Strobe lighting provides a flicker of hope in the fight against
Alzheimer’s

   Read more

   Alex Forsythe at the University of Liverpool analysed more than
   2,000 paintings from seven famous artists and found what she
   believes are progressive changes in the works of those who went
   on to develop Alzheimer’s. The changes became noticeable when
   the artists were in their 40s.

   Though intriguing, the small number of artists involved in the
   study means the findings are highly tentative. While Forsythe
   said the work does not point to an early test for dementia, she
   hopes it may open up fresh avenues for investigating the
   disease.

   “I don’t believe this will be a tool for diagnosis, but I do
   think it will trigger people to consider new directions for
   research into dementia,” she said.

   William de Kooning’s Woman 1, 1950 and Untitled XXVIII, 1983

   [126]Facebook [127]Twitter [128]Pinterest


   William de Kooning’s Woman 1, 1950 and Untitled XXVIII, 1983.
   Composite: Alamy

   The research provoked mixed reactions from other scientists.
   Richard Taylor, a physicist at the University of Oregon,
   described the work as a “magnificent demonstration of art and
   science coming together”. But Kate Brown, a physicist at
   Hamilton College in New York, was less enthusiastic and
   dismissed the research as “complete and utter nonsense”.

   Forsythe and her colleagues used digital imaging software to
   calculate how a mathematical feature called fractal density
   varied in artists’ paintings over their careers. The seven
   artists included Monet, Pablo Picasso and Marc Chagall, who all
   aged without obvious brain disease; Salvador Dali and Norval
   Morrisseau, who developed Parkinson’s; and de Kooning and James
   Brooks, another abstract expressionist who was diagnosed with
   Alzheimer’s in 1985, seven years before his death.

   Fractals are geometric patterns that repeat themselves at
   different size scales. They are seen in nature in the branching
   of trees and rivers, and in the craggy contours of coastlines.
   In paintings, fractals appear when patterns made by the tiniest
   brush strokes repeat on larger scales. The fractal dimension is
   a measure of fractal complexity, where an artwork with a large
   fractal dimension has a high ratio of fine to coarse fractal
   patterns.

   Forsythe found that paintings varied in their fractal
   dimensions over an artist’s career, but in the case of de
   Kooning and Brooks, the measure changed dramatically and fell
   sharply as the artists aged. “The information seems to be like
   a footprint that artists leave in their art,” Forsythe said.
   “They paint within a normal range, but when something is
   happening the brain, it starts to change quite radically.”

   Writing in the [129]journal Neuropsychology, the scientists
   claim that the fractal dimensions of paintings by Monet,
   Picasso and Chagall tended to rise as they aged. For Dali and
   Morrisseau’s work, the fractal dimension followed an
   upside-down U-shape over time, at first rising and then
   falling. The most stark result was seen in the works of de
   Kooning and Brooks, where the fractal dimension started high
   and dropped rapidly from the age of 40.



