[70]Artificial Emotions


   By Neil Savage

   When Angelica Lim bakes macaroons, she has her own kitchen
   helper, Naoki. Her assistant is only good at the repetitive
   tasks, like sifting flour, but he makes the job more fun. Naoki
   is very cute, just under two feet tall. He’s white, mostly,
   with...[71]READ MORE


   As ridiculous as that sounds, it’s not too different from the
   program in engineering which I took. You didn’t actually get to
   touch the violin until the senior year. I never actually built
   or designed anything until the last semester of an
   eight-semester program. By the way, it never worked—the project
   that I created—it didn’t seem to matter: I graduated at the top
   of my class and I got a fellowship to go to MIT, so they didn’t
   care about it either.

   What we’ve done in the way we teach engineering today is so
   overcommitted to the basic science behind engineering that
   we’ve omitted the whole act of discovery, of framing the right
   problem. The Wright Brothers would not be interested in
   engineering the way it’s taught today.

   If you look at the numbers [from] last May, during commencement
   season, millions of students across the U.S. completed their
   bachelor’s degrees, but fewer than 5 percent of them completed
   a bachelor’s degree in any kind of engineering at any
   university in America today.

   By the way, that compares with about 12 percent in Europe and
   about 30 percent in Asia. Of the kids who are starting this
   fall to major in engineering—are just getting underway in their
   fall term—fewer than half of them will ever graduate in
   engineering. Some of them might graduate in other disciplines,
   but they are going to leave engineering. A really substantial
   fraction of those who leave have higher grades than those who
   stayed, it’s really what we call the math-science death march
   through the curriculum that drives them out.

   What is an engineer?

   The definition of engineering that’s very commonly used today
   is probably off. If you think about what engineers do, they are
   people that create new things that change the world. So we’ve
   concluded that an engineer is a person who envisions what’s
   never been and then does whatever it is to make it happen.

   Now, the interesting thing about that definition is that it
   doesn’t even include the word science; in fact it’s implicit.
   And secondly, it doesn’t begin with mathematics; it begins with
   vision. Unless you have vision for new things—things that have
   never been yet—and have the passion to complete whatever it
   takes to make it happen, we don’t believe you are an engineer.
   You may well be an applied scientist, something of that sort,
   but that’s great.

   One example for this is like the aircraft industry, [which] was
   invented by two bicycle mechanics in Ohio—not by physicists in
   a lab. These guys used the process of engineering.

   We’ve also concluded that engineering is not a body of
   knowledge. Yes, it involves knowledge, but engineering is
   fundamentally a process, and it’s the process of
   engineering—like what the Wright Brothers did—which is most
   engaging, which is most fun, and which is what students love to
   do as well.

   Why do you believe engineering is the new liberal arts?

   If you look at the trends over the last 30 years in higher
   education as a whole, we’ve seen a decline in the general
   education requirements and competencies of students at almost
   all universities in STEM subjects.

   Here is the way to look at it: You can major in history at any
   major university and you’ll have a math requirement. But if you
   look at the math requirements that are counted for general
   education, they are math for history majors or they are math
   for people who aren’t really interested and committed to making
   a STEM career. There are lots of physics for poets sorts of
   courses out there; but there aren’t any courses in history or
   English or philosophy for STEM majors. You have to take the
   same English, history, and philosophy course that the majors in
   those disciplines take in order to complete those general
   education requirements.

   Over time, what’s happened, I believe, is that the competence
   in the STEM fields of college graduates in America has
   weakened, but the competence in the verbal and social science
   fields has not. That really means, at the end of the day, it’s
   the engineering graduates who still have the well-rounded
   rigorous background in all disciplines that used to be there
   for all majors. That helps explain one of the interesting
   facts, that engineering graduates are over represented among
   CEOs of S&P 500 companies.

   I believe there are a number of references on this: Spencer
   Stuart does a study of the backgrounds of CEOs of his companies
   every year and while engineering graduates make up only about
   less than 5 percent of the bachelor’s degrees in America, they
   make up about 25 percent of the CEOs.

   Does project-based learning only work for very bright students?

   Well, that’s obviously the first worry that everyone has. Well
   this might be great for geniuses, right? So if you have
   gazillions of dollars and geniuses then maybe this is a cool
   thing to do. That’s a worry that we take very seriously. We’ve
   been working specifically with other universities that don’t
   have especially precocious students or very demanding entrance
   requirements to see if the principles that we’re using will
   still work.

   We have a very mature program and partnership with the
   University of Texas, El Paso. University of Texas, El Paso is
   one of the highest producers of Hispanic background engineers
   in the U.S. A good fraction of those students drive over the
   river from Mexico every day to take classes. They are an
   open-enrollment university, which in a sense means that the
   only two entrance requirements are a pulse rate and a high
   school diploma. This is not what you would call a school that’s
   restricted for highly precocious students. We’ve been doing
   this for two or three years with them and the results, so far,
   are remarkable. They are getting the same kinds of answers that
   we are.

   It turns out that this business of finding out what students
   are passionate about and empowering them with what we call
   designed thinking—which is the ability to frame the right
   questions for the right problem to solve, and show them how to
   develop the materials at their own—that this works at every
   level of the educational spectrum.

   How does Olin tackle the motivation problem?

   Every student at Olin—in about the second semester I
   think—takes a course in which we put them in a small team,
   maybe five students, and we ask them to identify a group of
   people whose lives they want to change—not someday, but within
   the next four months. We’re pretty lenient about who they come
   up with, but let me give you a case study so that you’ll get
   some real texture to this.

   One group of students said, “Well, my grandmother has
   Alzheimer’s now and we went to visit her in the holiday. She is
   in an assisted living facility. Everything has changed for her;
   I would like to do something to improve the lives of the
   elderly.”

   We said fine. Let’s identify 10 elderly people within a
   10-minute drive of our campus who will agree to allow you to
   interview them for two hours. Then this team of five students
   has 20 hours of interviews with 10 people who are in that
   representative group. At the end of two weeks, they come back
   and they’ve answered the fundamental question: What does it
   mean to be elderly in America today? What they find out is that
   the question has a lot of dimensions. What does it in terms of
   age? What does it mean in terms of lifestyle, in terms of food,
   in terms of entertainment? But most importantly, what does it
   mean in terms of what keeps you up at night? What are they most
   worried about?

   As they construct this sociological profile of [older folks],
   they conclude that there is an arch to this that they heard in
   everybody’s comments, and that is a fear about what happens
   when the day comes that you are no longer able to walk: You are
   immobile. From that day on, you are living in a wheelchair and
   they heard things like, well, from that day on you no longer
   can look people in the eye; now you look at their belt buckle
   and they look down on you. By the way, you can’t walk so you
   can’t burn calories, so your metabolism changes, it’s very hard
   to control your weight. In fact, it’s even hard to know what
   your weight is. So they are talking about this.

   The students, who are about 19 at this point, came up with an
   idea, “Well, wait a minute, we don’t know we can do this but I
   imagine it’s not hard: What if we were to invent a little
   carpet that has pressure sensors and you could drive your
   wheelchair onto the carpet. There is an RFID radio transmitter
   on the carpet and it transmits a signal to your cell phone and
   your cell phone has a piece of software that will translate
   this and in fact subtract out the tear weight of the wheelchair
   and just tell you what you weigh. Would that be of any interest
   to you?”

   They go back to these 10 people and they explained “well, we
   have been thinking about this, we don’t know whether this is a
   good idea, what do you think?” The 10 people just go ballistic
   and they said, “Well, I mean it’s not going to keep us from
   getting old, but it’s sure going to make our life better. You
   think you can actually make one?”

   The kids come back to campus and now they are on fire. Where do
   we learn about pressure sensors? Who can tell us on the faculty
   about radio transmitters and how long do we have to wait before
   we can do software development? They are pulling us to the
   curriculum. They are not saying, “Well I guess the next
   semester I have to take Physics 102.”

   The two things that are happening there is that they care about
   these people. This is intrinsic motivation. These are people
   that they told us they cared about, so you have to find what
   kids care about first. Secondly, you do everything you can to
   help them find the answers to the questions that they are
   interested in as empowerment. When they get through with this,
   they are convinced that they can now change the world; they can
   make a difference in people’s lives.

   By the way, in this particular case, these kids built a
   prototype in about four months after they got through this—on
   their own. The next course in the curriculum is how to start
   and run a business. They wound up competing in a business plan
   competition for neighboring Babson College, won the prize, and
   used the capital to start their own company. Today, they are
   not working for Boeing or going to Harvard Business School;
   they are running their own company because they are
   intrinsically motivated. The average kid at Olin when they walk
   across the stage has completed 20 to 25 design build projects.
   They believe that engineering is about making things, it’s not
   about finance. My belief is that every kid is passionate about
   something; everyone cares about somebody.

   What is mindset and how do you teach it?

   There is a great deal of work now on changing mindset. I’m not
   sure if you are aware of Carol Dweck at Stanford. Carol is a
   professor of psychology. She just won the Atkinson Prize at the
   National Academy of Sciences this spring for the work that she
   summarizes in a book called Mindset.

   What she did is she worked for 25 years with young students, in
   K-12, about what it is about their beliefs of who they are and
   what they are capable of doing [that] has an impact on their
   ability to learn. The fundamental thing that she found is that
   the teacher shapes a lot of this belief, which determines their
   outcome.

   In particular, if you have a student and give them their test
   back and say, “Congratulations, I’m proud of you because this
   test shows that you are very smart,” you’ve made a huge mistake
   in terms of inspiring them to do more, to grow their academic
   achievement. Instead, you should be telling them,
   “Congratulations I’m proud of you! You did well on this test
   because you worked so hard. If you continue to work hard there
   is no limit to what you can achieve.”
   Get the Nautilus newsletter

   The newest and most popular articles delivered right to your
   inbox!
   ____________________
   ____________________
   Subscribe

   ____________________

   If you think that your success in life is because of your
   intelligence that you were born with, and you think that that’s
   a fixed quantity like your eye color, then there is nothing you
   can do about it and students wind up shying away from work. In
   fact, if you work hard, then it’s evidence that you are not
   smart. This really is a big turning point in children’s lives.

   That’s the tip of the iceberg, I believe, of a whole area
   called mindset, and let me explain another issue here. It turns
   out that companies are desperate to find employees today with
   mindset, not just knowledge and skill. If you look at groups
   like IBM, which has something called the T-shaped employee,
   what they mean by that is the tall vertical stem is about depth
   in a particular discipline. The horizontal bar across the top
   is the ability to communicate well with people in other
   disciplines, and that breadth is the part that they are worried
   about.

   You get the same kind of thing from a group called
   STEMconnector, which is talking about workforce 2.0;
   Business-Higher Education Forum has a list. They are all
   talking about things like the ability to collaborate with
   others, the ability to think creatively across disciplines, the
   ability to think in a designed sense, the ability to have
   ethical empathetic motivations in life, and the ability to
   think globally. These are what’s called soft skills. They are
   all about mindset, so the question is can you teach it, and
   Carol Dweck has shown mindset is not some fuzzy concept. It can
   be defined in precise terms; it can be measured; it can be
   taught; and it can have measurable impact over a long period of
   time. We can do this. In fact, I believe every time you walk
   into the classroom and you pick up a piece of chalk to teach
   calculus you are not just teaching calculus, you are teaching
   mindset.

   Why do you consider Israel’s Technion to be such a good example
   of mindset?

   A few years ago, maybe months ago now, there was an article in
   the Wall Street Journal about the new Cornell Tech campus
   that’s going in on Roosevelt Island. I don’t know if you’ve
   heard about this. Cornell picked the Technion in Israel as a
   partner in putting this campus together.

   Now this was a rather surprising thing for the reporter, why
   Cornell would go abroad to pick a partner. They interviewed
   Peretz Lavie, who is the president of the Technion, and they
   asked him why he thought they were chosen. He said well, the
   primary reason is that Israel, and in particular the Technion,
   is a generator of an enormous number of successful spinoff
   companies that have changed the economy and put Israel on the
   map, that it’s in fact one of the most successful centers of
   new tech invention in the world.

   That confused the reporter even more he says, “Now this doesn’t
   make any sense. Israel is like one of the most fragile, risky
   locations on the planet. Haven’t you noticed that there are
   people around you on all sides who are pointing missiles at
   you? How could you possibly be inventing stuff?” And that’s
   where Peretz Lavie stopped and he said, “No, you got it exactly
   wrong.” He said, “You can’t live in Israel without being an
   optimist. You have to imagine that the world could be a better
   place and you have to realize it’s only going to happen if you
   take the initiative to make it happen.”

   That’s the essence of this growth mindset that Carol Dweck is
   talking about, that’s the essence of what it means to be an
   entrepreneur, and that’s certainly the essence of what Olin
   thinks of as being an engineer. It’s a mindset.

   Why are so many of today’s education innovations being driven
   by engineers?

   I don’t think it’s an accident that many of the most innovative
   dimensions to higher education today are being developed in
   engineering schools—not just Olin. You may have heard of MOOCs
   for example, that came out of Stanford; and MIT and edX
   program: These didn’t just coincidentally happen from
   engineering schools. Not only is it about technology, but there
   is something about engineering [that] I think predisposes it to
   being in the right place at the right time, and here is what it
   is:

   If you are the president of a major state university that has a
   whole array of different undergraduate programs, one of the
   things that you notice is only one of those undergraduate
   disciplines has a requirement for an external accreditation and
   that’s engineering. There is no accreditation board for
   economics or for English or for history, but there is for
   engineering.

   What does that matter? What that means is [that] at least every
   six years, and usually more frequently, you are forced to have
   a conversation with people in industry who come in and talk
   with you about what you are doing with your educational program
   and what’s needed when people leave. These conversations, if
   you talk to engineering beings, are rarely fun or congenial,
   but there are dose of reality. That provocation—and the
   requirement that you meet their expectations in order to
   continue your program—motivates them to try things [that]
   people who are in a much more insular environment with no need
   to talk with people in the outside don’t ever try.

   This has actually been confirmed recently by a guy named
   Brandon Busteed at the Gallup Corporation. You might want to
   talk to him if you don’t know him—he is really a fascinating
   guy. He did the largest survey in history of the impact of
   higher education on people’s lives, their careers, and later in
   their career—together with Purdue University.

   I just want to bring one little aspect up. He talked to 1,500
   surveyed chief academic officers at major universities and he
   asked them what their opinion was about how successful they
   were at producing graduates who were well prepared for their
   next step in their career. It won’t surprise you to hear that
   they were very confident that they were doing the right thing,
   something like 95 percent believe that the graduates are
   extremely well prepared for the next step in their career.

   But Gallup being Gallup, they also interviewed an equal number
   of people who are HR directors at major companies—same
   question. They didn’t get the same answer: It’s more like 10 to
   15 percent. There is a gap there, and the gap is growing.

   The person in the corporate world … Well the person in the
   academic world is basically saying we’ve never produced
   graduates who are better at solving the calculus problems than
   they are today. They do them quicker, they are more efficient.
   The people in the corporate world are saying so what? That has
   no relevance to what we need. We need graduates who can
   collaborate with others, who were creative, who can work on
   real world problems, who can make a difference in the world.
   That’s a mindset issue, and higher education has been blind to
   their responsibility to shape the mindset of the next
   generation. This is a big issue now.

   If I put you in a room with a bunch of engineering graduates,
   how would you pick out the Olin graduate?

   That’s a really interesting question because we’ve actually
   seen this before, and I’ve seen this with employment screening
   tests at different companies. Here is the way it would turn
   out: If you were going to look for the non-Olin graduate and
   you would have an oral exam with an applicant for the new entry
   level job at your company, then ask them very specific
   questions about the particular engineering courses.

   You would say, “I’m going to design a heat-transfer fin for an
   air-cooled gasoline engine and this is what the fins look like
   on this motorcycle. Can you tell me what the heat transfer law
   is and tell me what the link for the fin should be if it’s made
   out of aluminum to transfer this amount of heat per minute?” Or
   you could say, “I have a spring that has a rate constant of 10
   pounds per inch and I’m hanging on it a 5-pound weight and the
   base of this spring and mass is wiggling at two cycles per
   second. What’s the natural frequency of this device and how
   much does it move?”

   Those are the kinds of questions that you see in engineering
   courses. The Olin students will fall asleep if you talk about
   that. They can eventually find the answer but it’s not at the
   tip of their tongue; it is not what makes them wake up. The
   question that separates the Olin students is the question in
   which nobody knows there is an answer and the students are
   asking whether this is the right question. Do you have the
   right people in the room? Have you framed the question right?
   Why does this question matter?

   That’s where the other students from the other programs just
   freak out—that’s not engineering, we don’t know what to do
   there. It turns out that’s what makes the most difference. If
   you are going to design a new product, you don’t already know
   what the equations are. You need somebody who can think out of
   the box, who can understand what the purpose of the device is,
   and who are the right people that you need to assemble in order
   to answer the questions.

   Why doesn’t Olin grant tenure?

   Well, why give them that? I mean, one of the problems is that
   it’s irrelevant and it tends to feed a mindset. Here is an
   illustration: A few years ago, you might remember we had a
   financial crisis in this country, in 2008, the Great Recession.
   If you walked around a major university campus—let me say a
   state university just for illustration—and you talked to
   faculty members at the coffee machine and you asked them about
   the difficulty in this recession you might hear comments like,
   “Gee, this is really dangerous, I wonder what they are going to
   do about it.”

   If you did that at a school that doesn’t have tenure, like
   Olin, the conversation will be just slightly different. You ask
   them about the recession, they say, “Well, this is a very
   difficult problem. I wonder what we are going to do about it.”
   They have skin in the game. They realize that it’s our
   institution as a whole that’s at stake; it’s not somebody
   else’s job to worry about the institution. That’s an important
   distinction, I believe.

   I mean, there are some subtle things as well. The percentage of
   women on engineering faculty members is not the same as the
   percentage of men. It’s been very low for many years. Part of
   the problem, I believe, is the way the tenure system works
   where there is a clock running and within seven years you have
   to have a certain number of accomplishments done or you don’t
   qualify for tenure.

   What if you are a woman and you start your family in that
   period? What happens is that you put yourself at a disadvantage
   in the promotion process. You get off the clock, right, and a
   lot of the reviewers don’t pay much attention to why you got
   off the clock. You are just off the clock so maybe that’s a
   reason to be worried about productivity. What if you don’t have
   a clock? What if you don’t have tenure? This makes quite a
   difference.

   There is a series of other issues as well. One of them is that
   tenure is a lifetime commitment to an individual rather than to
   what they are doing. You discover that as people mature in
   their career—from the time they are 25 and they join you as an
   assistant professor until the time they are 70 when they
   leave—there are certain sort of seasons in their life where
   they are really good at research; other parts of their life,
   they really care about young people and about mentoring and
   about teaching; and some parts of their career where they care
   about building new programs; and the tenure system doesn’t
   recognize that. Everybody does the same thing all the time—it’s
   like 40-40-20, teaching, research, and service, and you have to
   produce this.

   What if a person just decides that they don’t really have an
   interest in doing the same teaching thing for the rest of their
   career, or maybe they are no longer excited about competing for
   research grants—they would like to do something different.
   Well, then it turns out that the flexibility that’s available
   to an institution that doesn’t have tenure and can redirect
   your whole purpose for the next five years in a new direction
   is a real advantage.

   How did you decide to become an engineer?

   My dad sort of said I came out of the egg hatched to be an
   engineer. I always liked to make stuff. When I was a young kid,
   I mentioned I was in a farming community and the school was not
   great. I was the sort of kid who wouldn’t come in as long as
   the sun was out. I was outside making stuff. I had tons of
   lumber in the backyard and hammers and I was always building
   things, and I thought engineers built things. That sounded like
   the perfect thing to me.

   I originally thought I wanted to be a bridge engineer and
   actually I discovered after I got into my education that I
   didn’t want to be an engineer—it’s kind of an interesting
   thing. I thought the pinnacle of engineering—because I had
   never met an engineer until I went to the university—was
   bridges. I thought like the Golden Gate Bridge, because I was
   in California, man, the person who designed the Golden Gate
   Bridge must be like the smartest person on the planet. Maybe I
   could be like that!

   One summer I had an internship, which I think was in the county
   public works department in Fresno in California, and that
   winter there was a lot of rain and it had washed out some of
   the culverts and the small bridges out in the county. I
   actually got associated with the bridge department and I
   thought, “Man this is like, perfect!” So I brought all my books
   with me—the stress analysis books, the concrete design—and I
   brought my slide rule because in those days that was the thing
   we used.

   I sat down [and] on the first day, he brought out this picture,
   aerial photographs of the bridge that had been washed out. Then
   he brought another book that had the blueprints for how the
   bridge was designed. And then he brought out something he
   called the bridge book. He dropped down this big thick book on
   my desk I was like, “Man, this must be like the Ph.D. level
   analysis for bridges.” I opened the thing up and you know what
   it is? It’s essentially a Sears catalogue. You flip through the
   pages until you find the bridge that looks the most like the
   one that got washed out. You’d make two small calculations down
   in the corner—one of them is like the length times the width
   times the height and it tells you the volume of concrete; and
   the other one tells you how many tons of steel. You put them on
   this little form and you put the serial number of that bridge
   and you hand it to the contract department and they go out and
   bid it to the contractors.

   I said, “Wait a minute! I mean, when do I get to calculate the
   stresses and decide where the steel bars should go?” And he
   says, “Well we couldn’t possibly ask you to do that. You might
   make a mistake, and if you make a mistake then the bridge could
   fall down. We never ask our bridge engineers to actually
   calculate stuff because that’s too risky.” “This is it? This is
   what you do as a bridge engineer? You look in a catalogue and
   you write down the serial number and that’s it?” And he says,
   “Yes, that’s pretty much it, that’s what do.” “Who gets to make
   the catalog? Who gets to make this thing?” “Well you have to
   have a master’s degree to do that, and that’s done in
   Sacramento.” I’m like a freshman and I’m saying, “I guess I
   have to go for a master’s degree if you actually want to make
   stuff.”

   Eventually I figured out the guy who does the catalogue has a
   pretty boring job too. You just keep solving the same problem
   over and over again but with a little bit different geometry so
   it’s like rotated at 45 degrees now rather than 30 degrees. I
   said, “This is not fun. So when do you get to work on problems
   that don’t have solutions?” “Well then you have to have a
   Ph.D.” Okay. Then I wound up going on for a Ph.D. It just never
   ends.

   By the way, the Ph.D. is a license to do research, that’s what
   it’s about. It’s how to define a problem that nobody has solved
   yet, pioneer a solution to it, and get it published, that’s
   what they do. Of all my friends who have Ph.D.s I can’t name a
   single one who is still working on a problem even remotely
   related to the one they did their Ph.D. on. It’s completely
   different. It’s basically a way of thinking that allows you to
   think outside the box for new problems. In my case, I obviously
   got way off the farm and now engineering is an academic
   institution, not a device.


