Segment Transcript

   IRA FLATOW: I’m Ira Flatow. This is Science Friday. Welcome
   back to our program. I want you to know that we are very happy
   to begin our actual book review of the season. Nothing says
   holiday season like a best of list. Am I right? It’s our end of
   the year tradition to share the best science books we read this
   year. And there were some great ones.

   We talk a lot about books on Science Friday, and this year was
   a bumper crop; everything from climate change, to the
   microbiome, to profiles of women in science, to, well, the
   small things like the meaning of the universe. Small topic.
   That one really got us thinking, just as any good science book
   should. What about you? Which of this year’s science books
   spoke to you? Give us a call 844-724-8255, and you can also
   tweet us @scifri.

   Joining me to recap some of the best science books of the year
   are two recurring guests. Maria Popova is editor and founder of
   the website brainpickings.org and Lee Billings, editor at
   Scientific American. Welcome back. Good to see you.

   MARIA POPOVA: So wonderful to be here.

   IRA FLATOW: Would you agree that it was a good year for science
   books, Maria?

   MARIA POPOVA: It’s a very strong year.

   IRA FLATOW: Yeah? Let’s start off with your top pick. What
   would you recommend?

   MARIA POPOVA: Without a doubt, one of the most beautiful, most
   interesting books I’ve ever read is “Black Hole Blues and Other
   Songs from Outer Space” by cosmologist, the novelist, Janna
   Levin, who you’ve had on the show. And it’s the story of the
   century long vision, originated by Einstein, and half century
   long experimental quest to detect a gravitational wave to hear
   the sound of spacetime. But one of the extraordinary things
   about the book is that it was written before LIGO made the
   historic detection. So, it’s not the story of the triumph. It’s
   the story of the climb, and it’s really a larger story of the
   human spirit and its tenacity, and why scientists do what they
   do. Why they devote entire lives two pursuits strewn with
   unimaginable obstacles and constant failure and do it anyway.

   IRA FLATOW: Yeah. It’s great when you learn about the process
   and the people–

   MARIA POPOVA: The people.

   IRA FLATOW: –involved in the book.

   MARIA POPOVA: Well, and I think Dr. Levin is in a very unique
   position to tell this story, because she’s a working scientist
   who studies black holes. That’s her bread and butter. But she’s
   also an award winning novelist. And so, she writes so
   beautifully with kind of Dostoyevskian insight into the
   character of these people, and you come to see that the genius
   and the foibles are just completely interwoven in the fabric of
   their personhood.

   IRA FLATOW: Yeah.

   MARIA POPOVA: And that science is just such a profoundly human
   endeavor.

   IRA FLATOW: And she had the bonus of actually being there when
   they made that discovery–

   MARIA POPOVA: Yes.

   IRA FLATOW: –and added it on to the book. Yeah. Lee, you
   recommended a, (CLEARS THROAT) excuse me, a trilogy of books
   that aren’t by the same author.

   LEE BILLINGS: That’s right.

   IRA FLATOW: What’s the connection?

   LEE BILLINGS: Well they’re all about the anthropocene and this
   idea that humanity is becoming a global geological force that
   can control the fate of the planet. And so, the three books are
   “The Unnatural World” by David Biello, “The Planet Remade” by
   Oliver Morton, and “Earth in Human Hands” by David Grinspoon.
   They all offer three different views on the anthropocene.

   “The Unnatural World” by David Biello, a former colleague of
   mine and friend I should say, is kind of getting a ground truth
   look at how the planet’s changing, some of the key players
   involved at high policy levels, and just street levels that are
   helping some of these changes come about or combating them in
   some cases. He’s traveled around the world to do that. So, he’s
   traveled to Beijing. He’s traveled to other parts of China and
   all over the south polar seas, crazy places.

   IRA FLATOW: Yeah.

   LEE BILLINGS: The other two books, Oliver Morton’s book is
   actually from 2015. I’m sorry that I kind of slip it in, but it
   didn’t get enough credit, I think, when it first came out. It
   is the most authoritative book that I’ve read about
   geoengineering. Oliver Morton is a journalist in Britain, who’s
   spent more than a decade researching this problem about how we
   could control the climate in the future. And he gets really
   deep into policy and talks about weird situations like it’s
   really not that cheap to do some of these things, some of these
   big experiments with the climate. You can imagine an individual
   billionaire or rogue nation doing that and it’s kind of scary.
   So, he gets real deep into policy.

   The final one, David Grinspoon’s “Earth in Human Hands”, is
   from a more astrobiological perspective, because he’s an
   astrobiologist. And so, he’s talking about the potential cosmic
   implications of the anthropocene, and of a sentient species
   taking control of it’s planet. What does that look like in the
   far future, and does it have implications for our search for
   life elsewhere, for instance? Could it be that something like
   the anthropocene is going to last longer than hundreds of
   thousands of years and maybe stretch into hundreds of millions
   or billions of years.

   IRA FLATOW: Let’s hope we’re still here–

   LEE BILLINGS: I hope so.

   IRA FLATOW: –for what we’re doing with the anthropocene. Maria,
   people are looking for a book to enjoy with their kids. Got a
   kid’s pick for us?

   MARIA POPOVA: Yeah. I have one that ties into what Lee was
   saying in terms of the relationship between humanity and our
   planet. It’s a wonderful book by the British artist Jenni
   Desmond, who is a Maurice Sendak fellow, and it’s called “The
   Polar Bear.” It’s part of a non-fiction series that she’s
   doing.

   Last year in this end of year review, we included “The Blue
   Whale”, which was her first one. And now, comes “The Polar
   Bear”, which is the life, and world, and science of one of our
   planet’s most vulnerable creatures. But it came out right
   around the election, so it’s very interesting to think about
   now that we can’t count on politicians to advance science and
   to protect the planet and to educate the next generation about
   responsibility. It falls on us. It falls on parents, and on
   educators, and this really wonderful book is just such a
   wonderful tool for that.

   IRA FLATOW: Interesting. 844-724-8255. Yeah, there are a lot of
   things that it looks like we’re going to have to do on our own.
   Let’s go to Kenai, Alaska. Cathy, welcome to Science Friday.

   CATHY: Hi. How are you?

   IRA FLATOW: Hi there. Go ahead. Thank you.

   CATHY: I love your program. I listen to NPR all the time. And
   the book I’m in I’m interested in is “Hidden Figures”, which I
   believe you spoke about a couple of weeks ago on your program.

   IRA FLATOW: What did you like, Kathy, about it so much?

   CATHY: Well, I’m a math geek myself, but I’m also very
   interested in the history of women in mathematics and science.
   And I haven’t yet been able to get the book. I just ordered it
   for my dad for Christmas, but I’m anxious to read it myself. I
   think it sounds fascinating.

   IRA FLATOW: That’s great. Maybe we have a couple of other
   suggestions we could add on to that. Let me– Maria?

   MARIA POPOVA: Yeah, I think that book fits into a series that
   came out this year. Another one that is– “Hidden Figures” is
   about the black women mathematicians who helped put people on
   the moon, basically, during the space race. But almost a
   century before that, we have these women working at the Harvard
   Observatory who are known as the Harvard Computers, and their
   story is told in a book called “The Glass Universe” by Dava
   Sobel, which comes out next week on Tuesday.

   LEE BILLINGS: You know about it already.

   IRA FLATOW: (LAUGHING)

   MARIA POPOVA: Yea, she might appear on the show at some point.

   IRA FLATOW: Yeah, she will. We’ve already booked it.

   MARIA POPOVA: Wonderful!

   IRA FLATOW: It’s a preview of it.

   MARIA POPOVA: But these were women who are making astronomical
   discoveries 40 years before they were allowed to vote. And some
   of these discoveries we still use today to classify stars, and
   they were the foundation for how Hubble figured out that the
   universe is expanding, all on the basis of these women’s work.
   And it’s a really wonderful story that paved the way for women
   in science.

   IRA FLATOW: Lee, do you have any comment?

   LEE BILLINGS: Other than– well, Maria has taken several of my
   other favorites that I figured she could handle more than I
   could.

   MARIA POPOVA: (LAUGHING)

   LEE BILLINGS: But I think those are also some great topics. One
   book I did want to talk about was actually– I brought it into
   the studio, so you could see it yourself– it’s called
   “Spaceborne” by Donald Pettit. He’s a former astronaut who
   spent a lot of time in the International Space Station. And
   what’s special about this book is he is not just an astronaut,
   he’s also a photographer. And he’s taken, I think, some of the
   most iconic, best photos you’re ever going to see from the
   space station.

   IRA FLATOW: Yeah. We’re going to have him on next week.

   LEE BILLINGS: Oh, beautiful! You know the funny thing about
   Don, though, is that he technically cannot promote the book. As
   a federal employee of NASA, he technically cannot promote the
   book itself, so he’s going to have to talk about the
   photography and stuff.

   IRA FLATOW: Who knows with this new administration what you’ll
   be able to promote.

   LEE BILLINGS: Yes! Yes. But–

   MARIA POPOVA: (LAUGHING) Vested interests.

   LEE BILLINGS: Truly gorgeous book, though, and the story of how
   he took these photos is phenomenal. And it really give you a
   new view into the space station and also, into our planet.

   IRA FLATOW: Yeah. And he’s a wonderful speaker. We’ve actually
   talked to him from when he was up in space. He’s a funny guy.
   OK. Let’s move on to your next selection. Maria, both of you
   picked “Black Hole Blues” by Janna Levin, as you said. You
   brought a passage from Levin’s book to read to us. Can you pick
   that up there?

   MARIA POPOVA: Sure. And I’ll also add that I think there are
   three kinds of science writers. There are explainers, who are
   the kinds of people that write textbooks, they’re elucidators,
   who do more than inform and kind of illuminate the connections
   between things in most popular science books or that, and then
   there are enchanters, who really take us to these higher orders
   of meaning with beautiful prose, and that’s what I’m reading.
   It comes in the context that she’s talking about how
   gravitational astronomy is opening new landscapes of
   possibility, because everything we know about the universe
   comes, so far, from sight, and now, we’re beginning to listen.

   And this is what she writes. She says, “In the hopefully
   plentiful years that follow a first detection, the aspiration
   is for Earth based observatories to record the sounds of
   cataclysmic astronomical events from many directions and from
   varied distances. Scientists will reconstruct a clanging
   discordant score to accompany the silent movie humanity has
   compiled of the history of the universe from still images of
   the sky. A series of frozen snapshots captured over the past
   400 years since Galileo first pointed a crude telescope at this
   sun. Five decades after the experimental ambition began, were
   on the eve of the crash of a colossal machine into a wisp of a
   sound. An idea sparked in the 1960s, a thought experiment, an
   amusing haiku, is now a thing of metal and glass.”

   IRA FLATOW: Very nice. Very nicely read.

   MARIA POPOVA: And before the detection! Before the wisp of
   sound.

   IRA FLATOW: All right. Let’s go for another suggestion to the
   phones to Hallandale Beach, Florida. Elijah, hi, welcome to
   Science Friday.

   ELIJAH: Hey there.

   IRA FLATOW: Hey there. Go ahead.

   ELIJAH: The book that I suggest is “I Contain Multitudes: The
   Microbes Within Us and a Grander View of Life” by Ed Yong.

   IRA FLATOW: One of our favorite subjects, the microbiome. Lee,
   you want to talk about that? Do you agree with him?

   LEE BILLINGS: Well, I do agree with him. However, I should say
   that due to having a very young son at home who takes up all my
   time, I have not yet read “I Contain Multitudes”. I haven’t
   been getting a multitude of sleep. So, I think, actually, we
   should probably turn that to Maria, because I think she has
   read it.

   MARIA POPOVA: That’s on my list, actually. Yeah. It’s a
   wonderful book that’s completely worthy of it’s Walt Whitman
   reference of the title. And Ed Yong, who’s one of the most
   capable science storytellers, and communicators, and
   journalists today, basically looks at how the microbiome is
   related to everything from mental health to even free will.
   It’s absolutely fascinating.

   IRA FLATOW: Oh. Yeah, it’s a great book. It’s a great book.
   Lee, we have a lot of listeners who like birdwatching.

   LEE BILLINGS: Oh!

   IRA FLATOW: And for them, I know you recommend “The Genius of
   Birds” by Jennifer Ackerman. Why?

   LEE BILLINGS: Because it’s an appreciation, not only of, you
   know, birds, obviously, if you like birds, but it’s kind of
   giving you a deeper appreciation of non-human intelligence.
   It’s really casting doubt on this view we’ve had for a long
   time that we’re somehow special and unique in our ability to
   reason and make sense of the world. And I’m not saying that
   birds are as smart as people, but maybe bird brain isn’t as
   much of a slur as we think it should be.

   So, she’s traveled around to all kinds of places, New
   Caledonia, an island off Australia, to look at crows who build
   tools. She’s looked at things like pigeons in New Jersey or
   jays in Virginia that can do things like distinguish between an
   impressionist and a cubist painting. Or there’s lots of other
   examples, a birdsong being similar to language, their ability
   to remember locations and find them across thousands of miles,
   their flocking behavior, their social intelligence, the way
   they can tell sometimes the emotional tenor of their partners.
   These are all things that we’ve seen in birds, and Jennifer
   does a really, really good job of explaining, not only how
   we’re finding more and more of these behaviors, but also
   connecting it to their natural history, the way that birds are
   really just dinosaurs with feathers. And they don’t even have
   cortexes like we do, so their bird brains are strange.

   IRA FLATOW: They’re fascinating. Yeah. We’re finding out
   they’re smarter than we are.

   MARIA POPOVA: Speaking of non-human intelligence, there’s a
   wonderful book by Alexandra Horowitz, who is the head of the
   Dog Cognition Lab at Barnard, it’s called “Being a Dog”, and
   it’s about how dogs perceive a completely different version of
   reality than we do. And although, some of it is biologically
   wired, a lot of it is learned, so it’s really about how we can
   learn to use our smell– kind of learn from dogs to swing open
   the doors of our own perception.

   IRA FLATOW: Yeah. Everybody loves dogs.

   MARIA POPOVA: In New York, especially.

   LEE BILLINGS: Pigeons not so much.

   IRA FLATOW: I’m Ira Flatow. This is Science Friday from PRI,
   Public Radio International. Here with Maria Popova and Lee
   Billings talking about our favorite books this year. Let’s go
   to the phones. Let’s go to Berkeley, California. Hi, welcome to
   Science Friday.

   – Hi. Am I on?

   IRA FLATOW: Yeah, you’re on.

   – Hi, Ira. I love your show. Yes, I wanted to share some books
   that I’ve been giving to my nieces and nephews, and it’s a book
   for kids and young adult called “Doctor Bonafide”, and it
   teaches the kids about their anatomy. It’s like a workbook.
   It’s colorful. It’s instructional. It’s participatory.

   And even adults love to do it and work with them, because it
   really brings a lot of knowledge to understanding themselves.
   And the graphics and activity are just engaging. And what’s so
   unique about this is that the bones are actually outlined in
   typography so the actual name of the bone is outlined. And I
   know that my nieces and nephews have loved it, so it called
   “Doctor Bonafide” and it’s by a company called Know Yourself,
   and it’s awesome.

   IRA FLATOW: Thanks for that suggestion. Are you familiar with
   it?

   MARIA POPOVA: No. It sounds wonderful. But it made me think of
   another book for kids and young adults that’s in the vein of
   women in science. It’s called “Women in Science” by Rachel
   Ignotofsky, who’s an Illustrator, and it’s a lovely illustrated
   encyclopedia of pioneering women in science, people like Vera
   Rubin, who confirmed the existence of dark matter, and Lise
   Meitner, who discovered nuclear fission, Jocelyn Bell, who
   discovered pulsars, Katherine Johnson, who helped put people on
   the moon. She’s one of the figures in “Hidden Figures”. It’s
   just the lovely kind of light companion to “Hidden Figures” and
   “The Glass Universe”.

   IRA FLATOW: Speaking of women, we have a tweet from Emil
   Volcheck who says, I recommend “Lab Girl” by Hope Jahren. Are
   you familiar with that, Lee?

   LEE BILLINGS: I’m familiar. That’s another one that’s on my to
   read list, but I’ve heard very, very good things about this
   memoir of Hope’s experiences basically working in a lab and
   trying to balance being an average person– well, not an average
   person– above average person, I think, with a lot of the
   strange demands that are rather unique when you’re, I think, a
   woman in science.

   IRA FLATOW: Let’s go to the phones. Let’s go to South Dakota.
   Hi, Brad. Welcome to Science Friday.

   BRAD: Hey. How are you doing today, Ira?

   IRA FLATOW: Hey. How are you?

   BRAD: I’m wonderful. I’m on Interstate 90. I read several books
   this year that were really good. They were kind of some of the
   history of technology. I’m an engineer by education, a retired
   electrical engineer. But the one that I wanted to mention, in
   particular, was a book called “Pinpoint”, and it’s about the
   history of the GPS system and how far that’s come and how it’s
   reached into places way, way further than anybody ever dreamed
   of just, you know, location purposes to the point of it’s used
   for timing of stock market trades and things like that. Very
   interesting book on the history of that.

   IRA FLATOW: Yeah. We’re familiar with that one. Thanks for
   recommending that. Yeah, the history of GPS is fascinating.

   MARIA POPOVA: And it’s a favorite example that scientists use
   when people say, well, what’s the use of so and so. And, you
   know, GPS comes from Einstein’s relativity.

   IRA FLATOW: Right. We don’t have to talk about Tang, anymore,
   coming out of the space race.

   MARIA POPOVA: Speaking of relativity, another one of my
   favorite books, both this year and of all time, is “Time
   Travel” by James Gleick, who is an icon of– historian of
   science, wonderful writer, very similar to Janna Levin and just
   the lyrical quality of the prose. And it’s about the history of
   why we think about time travel, and why we’re so troubled by
   its directionality. So, it pulls on relativity theory and the
   history of science. It pulls a lot on philosophy, but is really
   a Literary book. So, a lot of [INAUDIBLE] a lot of using
   literature as a cross-pollinator of science and philosophy to
   ask this larger question of our relationship with time and how
   it factors into our consciousness.

   IRA FLATOW: Time is very popular now in entertainment, in
   movies, in film. A lot of time people talking about the time,
   which is my segue to say we have to take a break. So, we’ll be
   right back in about 30 seconds.

   MARIA POPOVA: (LAUGHING)

   IRA FLATOW: Stay with us. We’re talking about books with Maria
   Popova, editor and founder of the website brainpickings.org and
   Lee Billings, editor at Scientific American. Our number– lot of
   phone calls today– 844-724-8255. You can also tweet us @Scifri.
   Stay with us. We’ll be back with more books after the break.

   This is Science Friday. I’m Ira Flatow. We’re recapping the
   best science books of 2016 with Maria Popova of
   brainpickings.org and Lee Billings, editor at Scientific
   American and welcoming your phone calls. 844-724-8255, also
   your tweets at SciFri. Let me go through some of the tweets
   that have been coming in. Lots of people have tweeted us.

   I recommend “Overview: Aerial Photographs to Help Us See Earth
   and Human Impact from a New Perspective” by Alexa Quinn. She
   suggested that. Nicky says “Embryo: Science and Sentient
   Beings”. Gigi says, I recommend Teresa Bondora’s “The Periodic
   Table of Elements Coloring Book” for middle school and high
   school students. Great tools, she says. Also, Katey Howes says,
   for the younger book worms, I’m recommending Ruth Spiro’s new
   “Baby Loves Quarks” and “Baby Loves Aerospace Engineering”.

   MARIA POPOVA: That’s a smart baby there.

   [LAUGHING]

   IRA FLATOW: I’ll bet it is. Speaking of smart, let’s talk about
   Sean Carroll.

   LEE BILLINGS: Yeah. Of course, Sean Carroll is a physicist who
   has written a really great book called “The Big Picture”, and
   it’s rather, in some ways, a typical physics book. You could
   say it’s two books in one. One is just kind of giving you the
   standard explanation about how we know things we know about the
   universe, how the universe works.

   In particular, he has this idea of what’s called the core
   theory, which is him saying that quantum field theory can be
   used to explain, essentially, everything in our everyday life.
   So, maybe not the pulsations of a neutron star very far away,
   but anything you’re ever going to encounter in your life,
   quantum field theory explains. And then he uses that to dismiss
   things like the afterlife, telekinesis, psychic powers,
   astrology, so on and so forth.

   But it’s not just that. So, he kind of extrapolates from there–
   he jumps off from there from the idea that we live in this
   meaningless universe that’s incomprehensible, and we’re just
   specks of dust that mean nothing in it to more philosophy where
   he’s saying, well, can we draw some sort of philosophy and way
   to live our lives and way to drive meaning from the universe
   from this meaningless state we find from science. And of
   course, he says the answer is yes. It’s kind of a softer,
   gentler, more fuzzy version of the New Atheism in some ways
   that you you heard from folks like Hitchens, and Dawkins, and
   so on and so forth. But yeah. Very, very solid book. I adored
   it. And–

   IRA FLATOW: He’s a great writer.

   LEE BILLINGS: –if you don’t agree with him, you still can– you
   can find the areas of disagreement and those sorts of– finding
   where you disagree with him, I think, really can clarify your
   own views about the universe and about philosophy.

   IRA FLATOW: Yeah.

   MARIA POPOVA: Yeah. That book was also on my list, and I
   especially love what he calls poetic realism, which is if the
   universe is meaningless, how do we synthesize meaning in the
   act of living and thinking. It’s a very humanistic notion.

   IRA FLATOW: Let’s go to the phones. Let’s go to Virginia Beach,
   Virginia. Hi, Amber. Welcome to Science Friday.

   AMBER: Hi, Ira. Thank you so much for taking my question. I
   love your show.

   IRA FLATOW: Thank you. Go ahead.

   AMBER: So, I have a 13-year-old son who is an advanced reader,
   and he wants to grow up to be a quantum physicist. And on his
   Christmas list, he asked for books about black holes and the
   universe, and I was for suggestions for him.

   IRA FLATOW: Yeah. A lot of books there. Let me start on the
   left and move to the other side of the table. Thanks for
   calling, Amber.

   LEE BILLINGS: Sure. Well, if we want to go for one that’s a
   little less heavy hitting or– I shouldn’t say heavy hitting–
   but maybe a little easier to digest and read than Sean
   Carroll’s, which is a very weighty thick tome and also
   ideologically loaded, I would suggest going with Carlo
   Rovelli’s “Seven Brief Lessons On Physics”. He’s another
   theoretical physicist, and he published a series of columns in
   an Italian newspaper that was then condensed into this book–
   distilled into this book. It’s only 78 pages, and it covers
   general relativity, quantum mechanics, the structure of the
   cosmos, elementary particles, quantum gravity, probability
   thermodynamics, and our place in all of it. Right? Only in 78
   pages. You can read this thing.

   IRA FLATOW: Easy to understand stuff.

   LEE BILLINGS: Easy to understand, yes. So, I would recommend it
   for pretty much any reader.

   MARIA POPOVA: I would say “Black Hole Blues” is very much
   enjoyable for any kind of reader. There’s also another book
   called “Mapping the Heavens” by Priyamvada Natarajan, who’s a
   younger scientist who studies black holes and dark matter. But
   if you’re able to find, there’s an out of print book from 1991
   by a stern physicist called “Alice in Quantumland”, and it’s an
   allegory of quantum physics using “Alice in Wonderland” as the
   template. It’s a wonderful book.

   IRA FLATOW: You know, that reminds me of a book that I started
   reading when I was a kid that got me a lot of interested in
   science, and that was George Gamow, the physicist.

   MARIA POPOVA: Oh, yes.

   IRA FLATOW: And he used to write about relativity. He had a
   “Mr. Tompkins” series.

   MARIA POPOVA: (EXCITED) Yes!

   IRA FLATOW: You remember that one?

   MARIA POPOVA: They were so wonderful.

   IRA FLATOW: It was a serial in one of the New York magazines,
   like The New Yorker or something like that, and then he took
   them and put them all together into a book. Mr. Tompkins makes
   many cameos in James Gleick’s “Time Travel”.

   [LAUGHTER]

   IRA FLATOW: Great, but I mean, find it online somewhere, or out
   of print. But for the basic knowledge about relativity, it’s
   about a guy who lives in a world where relativity comes to
   life, so he explains what’s going on around him. I love it when
   scientists are able to do that.

   MARIA POPOVA: And not many are.

   IRA FLATOW: Yeah. All Right. Let’s see if we can go to the
   phones. Let’s go to Jack in Alexandria, Minnesota. Hi, there.

   JACK: Hi. I’d like to suggest “Dark Matter” by Blake Crouch.

   IRA FLATOW: Hmm.

   JACK: I don’t know if you guys have heard that. It just came
   out, I think, in, July of this year. And it’s about a physicist
   who just is living his normal life with a wife and kid and
   teaches at a tier two college in Chicago, and then is one day
   abducted. And it turns out, as you get into the book, that I
   won’t spoil it all, but he’s abducted by himself from another
   universe, and then explores the theory of the multiverse in a
   very compelling and gripping novel.

   IRA FLATOW: Wow.

   JACK: Yeah. So, his other self that comes and visits him
   developed a box that you can enter, and you take this drug that
   allows you to see infinite number of doors inside the box.

   IRA FLATOW: Yeah. We did this book. This was quite an
   interesting science fiction book.

   JACK: Yeah.

   IRA FLATOW: Yeah. Thanks for calling. It reminded me of a play
   on Broadway that actually was– now I can’t think of the name.
   It’s not playing any more. But the director or the writer
   actually had people sitting on different universes at the same
   time. They would read the lines a little bit differently. The
   next line you say, I just heard that, but no, it was sort of
   recreating what a parallel universe would be, a multiverse.
   Gyllenhaal was in that, I think. It was a good, good play. I
   can’t remember–

   [LAUGHTER]

   I guess I’ll have to recall it. But it seems, from what we
   hearing, a lot of people are interested in physics. A lot of
   physics books are being suggested, whether it’s black holes, or
   multiverses, or it’s quantum mechanics.

   LEE BILLINGS: I think we, maybe, just had a bumper crop this
   year of really solid physics writing, and maybe we always do
   every year. But I feel like something about this year, there
   was just a bumper crop of good physics books, so it’s just a
   random fluctuation, I think, maybe.

   MARIA POPOVA: But I also think the zeitgeist is always
   fermented by events, cultural events, and we cannot discount
   the fact that the LIGO discovery, which is a physics discovery,
   is one of the most important discoveries ever made in the
   history of science. Of course people’s, you know, the popular
   imagination is going to be captivated by that and fertilize the
   field.

   IRA FLATOW: Mm-hmm. And it is interesting how we’re now, as I
   said before, we’re now seeing more popular culture, whether
   films, or plays, or whatever picking up on this theme about
   science being very popular.

   MARIA POPOVA: But I would say, in a way, it’s sometimes to the
   detriment of another branch of science, which is social
   science, and we have not done a very good job of giving social
   science the respect that it deserves. And to that end, a social
   science book on my list called “The Confidence Game” by Maria
   Konnikova, who writes about–

   IRA FLATOW: She’s great.

   MARIA POPOVA: She’s wonderful. We get mixed up a lot because of
   our names–

   [LAUGHTER]

   –which I always take as a compliment, because she’s a wonderful
   writer, wonderful thinker. She writes for The New Yorker about
   psychology. And this book is about cons and why they work on
   intelligent, well-intentioned people. So, she kind of debunks
   the myth through 50 years of research and through profiles of
   some of the greatest con artists in the world, the myth that
   somehow only stupid or inferior people are susceptible. And you
   know, it’s interesting in the context of in a culture where
   masses of normal people have been swayed to ideologies based on
   fraudulent claims, you know, what that is, what human
   psychology that exploits.

   IRA FLATOW: Uh-hmm. And in the short minute I’ve got, do you
   have a last pick, Lee?

   LEE BILLINGS: I’m going to go with “The Age of Em” by Robin
   Hanson, George Mason University economist. Its his first book.
   It’s called “Age of Em”, E-M. Em stands for emulated brain.
   It’s the idea that in the future, maybe a hundred years from,
   where you can actually upload people’s consciousnesses and
   virtualize consciousness. It’s a wild idea, but what’s so nice
   about this kind of science fictional idea and this treatment in
   this book, which is, I have to say, very fun but very tough to
   get through, because it’s a very detailed book, is how rigorous
   it is.

   Hanson really goes through all of the possible implications for
   what this means for the economy, for human behavior, for sex,
   love, death, architecture. He goes through it all. And it’s one
   of those things where, again, maybe you don’t agree with
   everything he says, but when you figure out where you disagree,
   you come to interesting insights. And who knows, in the future,
   maybe our uploaded ancestors will see him as a prophet. I’m not
   really sure, but it’s a great, great read, dizzying with ideas.

   IRA FLATOW: I’ll bet. Well, that’s been great. Thank you, both.

   MARIA POPOVA: Thank you so much.

   IRA FLATOW: Time flies.

   LEE BILLINGS: My pleasure. Yes.

   IRA FLATOW: Maria Popova, founder of the website the
   brainpickings.org and Lee Billings, editor at Scientific
   American. And if you couldn’t keep up with the fast pace of our
   book picks, we have them up on our website at
   sciencefriday.com/books.

   Copyright © 2016 Science Friday Initiative. All rights
   reserved. Science Friday transcripts are produced on a tight
   deadline by 3Play Media. Fidelity to the original
   aired/published audio or video file might vary, and text might
   be updated or amended in the future. For the authoritative
   record of ScienceFriday’s programming, please visit the
   original aired/published recording. For terms of use and more
   information, visit our policies pages at



