Duality in spherical trigonometry

   Posted on [23]28 August 2016 by [24]John


   This evening I ran across an unexpected reference to spherical
   trigonometry: Thomas Hales’ [25]lecture on lessons learned from
   the formal proof of the Kepler conjecture. He mentions at one
   point a lemma that was awkward to prove in its original form,
   but that became trivial when he looked at its spherical dual.


   The sides of a spherical triangle are formed by great circular
   arcs through the vertices. Since the sides are portions of a
   circle, they can be measured as angles. So in spherical trig
   you have this interesting interplay of two kinds of angles: the
   angles formed at the intersections of the sides, and the angles
   describing the sides themselves.

   Here’s how you form the dual of a spherical triangle. Suppose
   the vertices of the angle are A, B, and C. Think of the arc
   connecting A and B as an equator, and let C‘ be the
   corresponding pole that lies on the same side of the arc as the
   original triangle ABC. Do the analogous process to find the
   points A‘ and B‘. The triangle A‘B‘C‘ is the dual of the
   triangle ABC. (This idea goes back to the Persian mathematician
   Abu Nasr Mansur circa 1000 AD.)

   The sides in  A‘B‘C‘ are the supplementary angles of the
   corresponding intersection angles in ABC, and the intersection
   angles in  A‘B‘C‘ are the supplementary angles of the
   corresponding sides in ABC.

   In his paper “Duality in the formulas of spherical
   trigonometry,” published in American Mathematical Monthly in
   1909, W. A. Granville gives the following duality principle:

     If the sides of a spherical triangle be denoted by Roman
     letters a, b, c and the supplements of the corresponding
     opposite angles by the Greek letters α, β, γ, then from any
     given formula involving any of these six parts, we may wrote
     down a dual formula simply by interchanging the
     corresponding Greek and Roman letters.

   Related: [26]Notes on Spherical Trigonometry
   Categories : [27]Math
   Tags : [28]Math
   Bookmark the [29]permalink



