A Light Shift

   The blackbody spectrum we measure today was created just a few
   months after the universe’s birth, when the number of photons
   generated in the early fireball had stabilized. “Anything that
   happens afterwards can distort the spectrum,” Kogut said.

   For the first couple of decades after that, the universe was so
   dense that any process producing extra energy, such as the
   annihilation or decay of dark-matter particles, would affect
   all of the CMB photons, creating what are known as mu (µ)
   distortions in the blackbody spectrum. In this situation, an
   energetic electron produced by the demise of a dark-matter
   particle could transfer some of its energy to a CMB photon,
   “distorting the microwave background away from a blackbody,”
   Kogut said.

   Even earlier spectral distortions might also have arisen from
   [18]inflation, a short but spectacularly fast period of
   expansion that many researchers think occurred in the
   universe’s very first moments.


   According to this theory, quantum fluctuations created dimples
   in space-time that inflation then amplified. Matter and
   radiation fell into these valleys, which eventually evolved
   into the first galaxies; the valleys explain how the chunky
   stew of a universe we see today emerged out of its brothlike
   past.

   The valleys should all be of different widths, depending on
   when the fluctuations arose and how long they had to inflate.
   But leading models of inflation predict that they should all
   have about the same depth, since the energy scale of the
   inflationary field, which produced the quantum blips, is
   thought to have changed only slowly over time.

   The matter and radiation that slid into the valleys rebounded,
   sloshing out and then over surrounding hills into other
   valleys, producing the hot and cold spots in the CMB. If no
   energy was lost during the sloshing, these spots would vary
   from the average CMB temperature by about the same amount. But
   some energy was lost. As the sloshing proceeded, more and more
   photons splashed out of the valleys. Because of this,
   the smallest ones, produced toward the end of inflation, no
   longer appear hot or cold. The effect, known as Silk damping,
   erases information about the depth of smaller valleys — and the
   energy scale of inflation at later times — in maps of the CMB’s
   temperature.

   The energy lost during the sloshing didn’t disappear, however.
   It went into “heating up the universe a little bit,” Kogut
   said. That would have shifted the CMB’s spectrum away from a
   blackbody. “It basically makes the universe look a little bit
   bluer — a little brighter at shorter wavelengths and colder at
   longer wavelengths,” Kogut said.

   Locating these spectral distortions could therefore reveal
   details about inflation on smaller scales, and later times,
   than is now possible. “That is information you could not get
   any other way,” said [19]Simon White, director of the Max
   Planck Institute for Astrophysics in Garching, Germany.
   Measurements of the depth of the dimples at later times could
   test how quickly the energy scale of inflation changed, which
   would test competing models of the theory, Kogut said.


   That’s important, said [20]John Mather, an astrophysicist at
   NASA Goddard who won a Nobel Prize in 2006 for measuring the
   CMB’s blackbody spectrum with COBE. One of the selling points
   of inflation is that it seems to explain the CMB’s incredible
   evenness across the sky — patches of sky that are far apart
   would have been touching before the exponential expansion of
   inflation. But the CMB’s uniformity was discovered years before
   the theory of inflation was developed in the 1980s, and Mather
   said the theory would gain credibility if it made predictions
   that were only later found to be true. “It’s not all that
   powerful to predict something you already know,” he said.


   Spectral measurements could also provide insight into the
   evolution of the universe at later times, when the universe had
   expanded enough that any injections of energy would be felt by
   only a fraction of CMB photons, producing what are called y
   distortions in the spectrum.

   Energy from stars, galaxies and galaxy clusters should
   stimulate the CMB, which could help pin down the rate at which
   stars form and explode and at which galaxies grow and evolve,
   Peebles said. “There are lots of ideas about how cosmic
   evolution proceeded, but not much evidence,” he said. Spectral
   distortion measurements would offer “a rigorous constraint on
   what is otherwise a very slippery business.”

   The $200 million PIXIE mission, which Kogut and his team are
   proposing to NASA for a potential launch in 2022, could search
   for all of these spectral distortions. With a sensitivity about
   1,000 times as great as COBE, it could potentially study
   inflation’s dimples at a scale one-ten-thousandth of what’s
   possible with the CMB hot and cold spots. The mission would
   also search for the signature of gravitational waves from the
   early universe with a precision 100 times better than that of
   current experiments.

   David Kaplan, Petr Stepanek and MK12 for Quanta Magazine; Music
   by Pete Calandra and Scott P. Schreer

   Video: Where Did the Universe Come From? This two-minute video
   explores the leading explanation for the origin of the
   universe.

   Despite its sensitivity, interpreting PIXIE’s results, should
   it launch, would be tricky. “Different processes … can lead to
   similar distortions,” said [21]Jens Chluba, an astrophysicist
   at the Institute of Astronomy in Cambridge, England. “However,
   with precise measurements, different scenarios can in principle
   be distinguished.”


   Kogut agrees. “The main source of confusion would be from dust
   in our own galaxy,” he said. However, he thinks that PIXIE can
   rigorously account for the influence of dust through its
   measurements of the sky at 400 different wavelength bands,
   since dust shines more brightly at certain colors than others.

   “The low-hanging fruit has been gathered,” Peebles said of CMB
   measurements to date. Trying to detect the CMB’s deviations
   from a blackbody spectrum is “a very difficult measurement, but
   one that can be done and would teach us a lot about cosmic
   evolution.”

   Half a century after the CMB was discovered, what can we expect
   in the future? Peebles is sure of one thing. “The next 50 years
   will be interesting.”

   This article was reprinted on [22]Wired.com.


   Update July 9, 2015: Jens Chluba’s affiliation has been
   updated.


