Don't miss out on WIRED's latest videos.
       [36]Follow


   Advertisement.

   (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON)

   [AIPokerTA_17011856983392.jpg]

   Slide: 1 / of 1. Caption: Caption: Professional poker player
   Jason Les plays against "Libratus," at Rivers Casino in
   Pittsburgh, on January 11, 2017.Andrew Rush/Pittsburgh
   Post-Gazette/AP
   [37]Skip Article Header. Skip to: Start of Article.


       A Mystery AI Just Crushed the Best Human Players at Poker


   Jason Les Professional poker player Jason Les plays against
   "Libratus," at Rivers Casino in Pittsburgh, on January 11,
   2017.Andrew Rush/Pittsburgh Post-Gazette/AP

   Another game just fell to the machines.

   Yesterday, [40]after 20 days of play at a casino in Pittsburgh,
   an AI built by two Carnegie Mellon researchers officially
   defeated four top players at no-limit Texas Hold ‘Em—a
   particularly complex form of poker that relies heavily on
   longterm betting strategies and game theory. Over the past
   twenty years, machines have topped the best humans at checkers,
   chess, Scrabble, Jeopardy!, and [41]even the ancient game of
   Go. But no AI had ever beaten the best at such an extreme game
   of “imperfect information,” a game where certain elements, such
   as the cards on the table, are hidden. Among humans, no-limit
   Hold ‘Em requires a certain degree of intuition, not to mention
   luck.


   ‘We’re playing against each other. But we’re also trying to win
   for the humans.’

   Carnegie Mellon professor Tuomas Sandholm and grad student Noam
   Brown designed the AI, which they call Libratus, Latin for
   “balance.” Almost two years ago, the pair [42]challenged some
   top human players with a similar AI and lost. But this time,
   they won handily: Across 20 days of play, Libratus topped its
   four human competitors by more than $1.7 million, and all four
   humans finished with a negative number of chips.


   Yes, poker is just a game. But the game theory exhibited by
   Libratus could help with everything from financial trading to
   political negotiations to auctions, says University of Michigan
   professor Michael Wellman, who specializes in game theory and
   closely follows the world of AI poker. In no-limit Hold ‘Em,
   players aren’t necessarily trying to win each small hand.
   They’re trying to win the most money, and that means developing
   betting strategies that play out over dozens of hands. A
   machine that masters no-limit Texas Hold ‘Em mimics the kind of
   human intuition these strategies require.

   According to the human players that lost out to the machine,
   Libratus is aptly named. It does a little bit of everything
   well: knowing when to bluff and when to bet low with very good
   cards, as well as when to change its bets just to thrown off
   the competition. “It splits its bets into three, four, five
   different sizes,” says Daniel McAulay, 26, one of the players
   bested by the machine. “No human has the ability to do that.”


