Corvallis sculptor fuses art and math



   090616-cgt-nws-snd-sculptor-01.jpg
   [73]Buy Now


   Jeremy Smith stands near a 15-foot sculpture he made out of
   half-inch PVC pipe at the Organic Growers Student Farm. Smith,
   a retired computer programmer, has made several smaller
   sculptures ranging in size, shape, and material. The sculpture
   is made up of 10 circles and a series of pentagons.
   090616-cgt-nws-snd-sculptor-02.jpg
   [74]Buy Now


   Jeremy Smith holds one of his favorite sculptures: It's made of
   street sweeper twine he found on the floor.
   090616-cgt-nws-snd-sculptor-03.jpg
   [75]Buy Now


   A collection of sculptures ranging in size, shape, and material
   made by Smith. Smith said he's fascinated by finding ways to
   link mathematics and art.

   Story Next Door logo (copy)

   [76]Buy Now



   In the middle of 3-acre grassy farmland a quarter-mile off of
   Highway 34 sits a new 20-foot tall sculpture that has baffled
   its creator, Corvallis’ Jeremy Smith, for more than a decade.

   The former computer programmer recently completed the enormous
   geodesic star dome at Oregon State University’s Organic Growers
   Club student farm. The project, constructed of several
   half-inch plastic PVC pipes, is meant to become a beacon of the
   fusion of math and art.

   “It’s a mathematical object and was built using mathematical
   measurements but it’s going to serve as a canvas so the
   students who work out there in the organic garden can change it
   and decorate it,” Smith said. “What’s fascinating about an
   object like this is it can be an infinite number of things. Who
   knows what will happen with it now?”

   The project is an extension of a regular icosahedron — a
   Platonic solid containing 20 triangular sides. The Platonic
   solids (the tetrahedron or pyramid, cube, octahedron,
   dodecahedron and icosahedron) are named after Plato, the
   ancient Greek philosopher who theorized that the classical
   elements were made of solids.

   “They were described by Plato as being perfect objects,” Smith
   said. “That’s what makes them so special. They are
   mathematically beautiful.”

   A regular icosahedron is commonly seen in tabletop gaming with
   20-sided dice and Dymaxion mapping, which projects a world map
   on an icosahedron so that when folded out to a two-dimensional
   space, it can preserve more accurate shapes and sizes. And it
   was the Dymaxion map that first intrigued Smith about 10 years
   ago while he was working with the Geosciences Department at
   OSU.

   “It was out of the blue and it totally absorbed me,” Smith
   said, adding that he was reminded of “Close Encounters of the
   Third Kind,” in which Richard Dreyfuss’ character becomes
   consumed by Devils Tower in Wyoming. “This has become my Devils
   Tower ever since.”

   The project is Smith’s latest attempt to combine math and art
   in a way that he hopes will eventually become linked in
   children’s education.

   “My job is to blow people’s minds. It’s a blast,” he said. “So
   many kids who are interested in the arts hate geometry and
   math, but this is fun.”


