Isaac Newton masterwork becomes most expensive science book sold

   First edition of Principia Mathematica, which was published in
   1687 and sets out Newton’s laws of motion, raises £3m at
   auction










   This article is 6 months old

   [124]Kevin Rawlinson


   Wednesday 14 December 2016 20.21 EST Last modified on Tuesday 2
   May 2017 13.31 EDT

   A first edition of Sir Isaac Newton’s Principia Mathematica has
   become the most expensive printed scientific book ever sold at
   auction after a winning bid of $3.7m (£3m), the auction house
   Christie’s has announced.

   The edition of Newton’s 1687 work, described by Albert Einstein
   as “perhaps the greatest intellectual stride that it has ever
   been granted to any man to make”, went for nearly two and a
   half times its highest estimate.

   It was one of the lots in [125]Wednesday night’s sale of fine
   books and manuscripts auctioned at Christie’s New York office
   which raised a total of £7.5m.


   The continental edition, which was intended to be distributed
   on the European mainland by Samuel Smith, bears some
   differences from the British edition. Only about 80 such
   [126]first editions were thought to have been published, with
   about 400 in total produced.


   Edmund Halley, the astronomer after whom the comet was named,
   edited the work, having encouraged Newton to produce a single
   text setting out his ideas. Halley paid for the printing
   because the Royal Society had run out of funds.

   The society retains two copies of the book, including the
   original manuscript on which the first print run in 1687 was
   based, which is described as its “greatest treasure”.

   Among other ideas, the work sets out Newton’s laws of motion
   and his law of universal gravitation. The work is a “benchmark
   in human thought”, Keith Moore, the head of the Royal Society
   library, has previously said.

   “It’s not just the history and development of science; it’s one
   of the greatest books ever published. It was hugely influential
   in terms of applying mathematics to basic physical problems.”

   He linked the popularity of scientific texts with the number of
   people who have made their money from technology advancements.
   “People who have big books these days maybe are the kinds of
   people who have made their money on the internet or the web ...
   If you have a few million quid to spend, why wouldn’t you buy a
   copy of Principia Mathematica?

   “If you’ve made your money from a really cool algorithm, you
   will probably appreciate Newtonian physics.”

   According to Christie’s, other sale highlights included nine
   lots of correspondence to the Marquis de Chastellux, featuring
   six letters by George Washington and three by Thomas Jefferson.
   They sold for a total of £900,000.

   Topics
















