Disorder and Disasters in High-Density Crowds

   By [46]Arianna Bottinelli and [47]Jesse L. Silverberg


   While mass gatherings are usually safe, sometimes things can go
   catastrophically wrong.

   For the most part, concerts, protests, rallies, inaugurations,
   pilgrimages, festivals, sporting events, and Black Friday sales
   come and go with few or no injuries. From time to time,
   however, an event takes a turn for the worse, and we hear
   stories of medical emergencies and tragic outcomes. For
   example, an oversold crowd at a 2012 Halloween dance party in
   Madrid resultehd in five fatalities, all of whom were women
   between the ages of 17 and 20. A few years earlier in 2010, the
   infamous Love Parade disaster in Germany led to 21 deaths and
   roughly 500 injuries.

   In both cases, asphyxiation was broadly found to be a lethal
   factor behind the tragedies. But how do these types of
   disasters occur? Given that most people are generally
   good-natured, why would anyone want to hurt someone else?

   The truth is that disasters at mass gatherings usually aren’t
   driven by malicious intent. Instead, a phenomenon called “crowd
   turbulence” was the principle culprit from the Halloween and
   Love Parade tragedies. In the same way that waves travel
   through water, this large-scale emergent collective motion is
   essentially a turbulent wave that moves through a crowd when
   people are packed at least five or six per square meter.
   Unfortunately, such compression waves can drive sudden and
   unexpected increases in pressure that rapidly lead to
   asphyxiation.

   In other mass gatherings, most notably Black Friday sales,
   people have tripped and been injured by trampling. Upon
   falling, they often cannot get back on their feet because the
   crowd is simply too dense. As with crowd turbulence, no one
   person is out to cause harm; instead, the underlying problem
   stems from large-scale collective motion.

   Time and time again, we find that emerging patterns in crowds’
   collective motion are the real source of disaster.

   Dense crowds with shoulder-to-shoulder contact collectively act
   like a soft material, with potentially disastrous outcomes.
   Photograph by Ulrike Biets, used with permission.

   In our recent work, [48]published in Physical Review Letters,
   we set out to understand the emergent collective properties of
   densely-packed crowds. With an eye towards crowd safety, we
   focused our efforts on comprehending the basic physical
   mechanisms underlying the most dangerous types of collective
   motion. As our studies of simulated crowds unfolded, we
   identified a recurring theme: emergent collective motion
   propagates through a disordered network of body-to-body
   contacts. Stepping back from this initial observation, we began
   to notice close similarities to research in materials science.
   In fact, we would soon discover that this analogy to other
   well-studied physical systems would open a whole new avenue to
   advance our work.


   We realized that the movement of dense groups of people is
   similar to the way grains settle in a silo, pills pour down
   assembly lines, and coffee beans pack in a bag. In these
   examples of granular systems, each “grain”—people, wheat,
   pills, or coffee beans—experiences contact forces with its
   neighbors as it finds its way into a static equilibrium
   configuration. As a result, densely-packed grains create an
   invisible network of forces, with some members experiencing
   higher forces and others experiencing less.

   Remarkably, this contact network can amplify small
   perturbations into large-scale collective motion. Moreover, the
   random and disordered nature of any given contact network
   ultimately selects preferential directions for the collective
   motion to propagate. Consequently, it is possible to
   anticipate—with a remarkable degree of accuracy—the collective
   behavior of a system of densely packed grains. So the following
   question naturally arose: can the physics of granular media
   have explanatory power for crowd disasters?

   We began by looking for established mathematical tools to
   analyze force contact networks. Mode analysis is a particularly
   useful method that applies to both real and simulated granular
   materials data. This analytical framework has the benefit of
   quantifying large-scale dynamical properties from the
   small-scale motion of each individual grain. At the heart of
   mode analysis is a correlation matrix that converts
   seemingly-random displacements of grains about their
   equilibrium position into a prediction for large-scale
   collective motion. The correlation matrix’s eigenvalues and
   eigenvectors are the equations for making these predictions.
   These quantities contain useful information about coherent
   large-scale motion, response to perturbations, and local
   structural stability. In particular, the eigenvectors
   corresponding to the largest eigenvalues—also called soft
   modes—are vector fields indicating preferential directions of
   motion for the system with a given contact network. Even
   better, soft modes are calculated on a case-by-case basis from
   the specific structure of each randomly self-organized network,
   allowing for example-specific predictions of collective motion.

   The adaption of mode analysis to analyze our high-density crowd
   simulations allowed us to reconstruct crowds’ soft modes and
   extract broader trends. Along these lines, we discovered a
   variety of surprising results.

   For example, the first mode—which is the easiest to excite—is
   actually a large-scale density wave that bears a striking
   resemblance to crowd turbulence. Using mode analysis, we were
   able track the origin of this collective motion to the general
   principle of continuous symmetry breaking. Essentially, a
   mathematical theorem connects any broken continuous symmetry to
   a low-energy, long-range excitation. These excitations are
   called Goldstone modes; in the case of broken rotational
   symmetry, the Goldstone mode is a density wave. Technically
   speaking, this theorem suggests any crowd packed at high
   density breaks continuous symmetry and thus is susceptible to a
   coherent wave that spans the entire crowd. The Goldstone mode
   is qualitatively extremely similar to crowd turbulence, and if
   the interpretation is correct, an asphyxia-inducing density
   wave is an inherent possibility within any dense crowd. This
   result is particularly concerning for anyone standing next to a
   wall or barrier, since they are most susceptible to harsh
   compression pressures when the Goldstone mode is excited.

   While thinking about incidents where people trip and are
   trampled, we asked whether it’s possible to predict who’s most
   likely to fall and identify high-risk areas in the crowd. In
   studies of granular matter, grains—people, wheat, pills, beans,
   etc.—placed in low-force regions of contact networks have a bit
   more area to move around. When the system jostles, these
   so-called “soft spots” are where things move the most. In the
   specific context of people, our analogy means a sudden
   disruption to the crowd would forcefully displace people in
   soft spots the furthest. Interestingly, we often found a soft
   spot right in the middle of our simulated crowds, which we
   suspect indicates that people standing there are the ones most
   at risk of tripping and being subsequently trampled.



   Arianna Bottinelli and Jesse Silverberg's study of the
   mathematics and emergent collective properties of
   densely-packed crowds could impact safety technologies and the
   way in which researchers study mass gatherings.

   Spurred by our findings, we dug deeper into the
   dense-human-crowd-as-jammed-granular-media analogy and
   investigated what happens as crowds become agitated. As one
   would suspect, the risks get worse. With ideas borrowed from
   the study of stochastic resonance, we were able to understand
   why. The extra jostling motion of a pushier crowd suppresses
   the jamming effects of the shoulder-to-shoulder contact
   network. Consequently, it’s easier for additional long-range
   waves, similar to the Goldstone mode, to travel through the
   crowd. Each of these new waves can propagate in its own
   direction, creating additional pockets within the crowd at risk
   for asphyxia-inducing pressures. This means that agitation
   makes it easier for a crowd crush to initiate, and harder to
   predict which direction collective waves will travel.

   Armed with a newfound understanding of the mechanisms giving
   risk to crowd disasters, we turn our eyes forward.

   In the future, our theoretical framework may have a profound
   impact on safety technologies and the way in which we look at
   mass gatherings. By adapting our analysis for real-time video
   data, we aim to predict where and when dangerous collective
   motions are most likely to initiate, and in which directions
   they will travel. The same technology would also help us
   localize soft spots in large crowds, which in turn could
   identify trampling risk for stampedes. Ultimately, the goal is
   to suggest real-world and real-time actions that safety experts
   can undertake to minimize the risk of disaster at mass
   gatherings.

   But we’re not there yet.

   In the meantime, our big takeaway from this study is a better
   understanding of how to stay safe. To minimize risk, be aware
   of your surroundings and how tightly-packed the crowd becomes.
   Even with the best intentions, people packed should-to-shoulder
   don’t have full control of their movement. Random, unexpected
   collisions between neighbors yield serious collective effects.
   It’s important to participate in the events about which you
   feel most passionate, but if you find yourself in a crowd
   that’s noticeably dense, you can protect yourself and others by
   spreading out and moving to an area with more physical space.

   The paper appeared in [50]Physical Review Letters, 117, 228301
   (2016). It is also available [51]on the arXiv.


   Further Reading:
   • Detailed list of human stampedes:
   • An intro to stampedes, crushes, and crashes:
   • Prior work on the Physics of Mosh Pits by co-author
   • Prior work on the Physics of Mosh Pits by co-author
   Silverberg et. al. (research paper):
   Arianna Bottinelli earned her Ph.D. in applied mathematics at
   Uppsala University in 2016. Her interests include complex
   systems and collective behavior in living systems, with a focus
   on human behavior. She was recently awarded a postdoctoral
   fellowship at the Nordic Institute of Theoretical Physics in
   Stockholm, where she will bring forward theoretical and
   experimental research on the physics of high-density crowds.
   Jesse Silverberg earned his Ph.D. at Cornell University in
   experimental soft matter physics and is currently engaged in
   postdoctoral studies at the Wyss Institute for Biologically
   Inspired Engineering at Harvard University. His work on
   emergent properties of mechanical networks touches on a wide
   variety of systems ranging from origami metamaterials and
   active matter to tissue-scale biomechanics.
   Please enable JavaScript to view the [56]comments powered by
   Disqus.[57]blog comments powered by Disqus
   About SIAM News Blogs


   The SIAM News Blog brings together updates on cutting edge
   research, events and happenings, as well as insights on broader
   issues of interest to the applied math and computational
   science community. Learn more or submit an article or idea.

   [58]Learn more
   Most Recent
   [59][Awards.png]
   [60]Happening Now
   [61]Red Sock Award Acknowledges Standout Posters at DS17
   [62][Awards.png]
   [63]Get Involved
   [64]James H. Wilkinson Prize
   [65][Research.png]
   [66]Research
   [67]Deep Learning Models in Finance
   [68][Research.png]
   [69]Careers
   [70]Beyond UQ: Dealing with Deep Uncertainty
   [71][Announcements.png]
   [72]Announcements
   [73]Illinois Students Named Champions in National M3 Challenge
   [74][CurrentIssue.png]
   [75]Current Issue
   [76]Electricity Demand Response and Optimal Contract Theory
   [77][ResearchNuggets.png]
   [78]Research Nuggets
   [79]Modeling Invasive Activity: Zebra Mussels’ Infiltration of
   North American Rivers
   [80]See More News
   Article Tags


   SIAM News







   3600 Market Street, 6th Floor, Philadelphia, PA 19104
   [87]webmaster@siam.org Copyright 2016 Society for Industrial
   and Applied Mathematics

     [87] email:webmaster@siam.org


