Setting sights on Everest

   In October 2011, Fredinburg—by then one of the early members of
   Google’s privacy team—and a few other Googlers trekked to
   Everest Base Camp. They brought with them a wide-angle lens
   camera owned by the Google Street View team, which was busy
   capturing images of every road on the planet. The photos turned
   out to be [28]good enough to publish.


   When he returned from the trip Fredinburg sent an email out to
   Google’s internal mountaineering group, asking if anyone wanted
   to join him on his next adventure. Only one person showed up to
   the video-conference: Michele Battelli, a member of the
   company’s Enterprise Search Group, who had just returned from a
   climbing trip in the Himalayan region of Ladakh in northwest
   India.

   The two had met some years before during an internal startup
   competition. They agreed to meet in Argentina in December
   2011—less than a month later—to climb Mt. Aconcagua, one of the
   Seven Summits, the highest mountains on each of the world’s
   seven continents. Although they nearly lost their toes, for
   fledgling mountaineers they fared well. Fredinburg again
   brought a Street View camera, and again the photos turned out
   well.

   Together he and Battelli co-founded a new team, which they
   called Google Adventures. Its mission: to scale and capture all
   Seven Summits for Street View. The photos from Mt. Aconcagua
   would be part of a portfolio that the two planned to use to
   make the ultimate pitch—asking Google to fund their expedition
   to Everest.

   First, though, Fredinburg needed some recovery time. Ever since
   separating from Eggers he had been operating at an extreme
   pace—climbing, partying, and experimenting with recreational
   drugs—and wanted to get grounded again. He asked Abelin to join
   him in doing a “Sober Q1” for the first quarter of 2012. Abelin
   agreed, and started inviting Fredinburg to charity galas in New
   York. At one of them he introduced Fredinburg to Amanda Slavin,
   a charismatic young woman who worked for the events team at
   Summit Series.

   Slavin recalls that Fredinburg was sporting a mohawk. He asked
   her why she found value in supporting charity when there were
   no clear returns. “He was kind of polarizing,” she says. “He
   had no real need or want to be a part of it. His mind was on
   logistics and engineering.”

   And yet, he was open to a new way of seeing things. “I told him
   that what I found is that when I do good, more comes back to
   me,” Slavin says. “A lightbulb went off for him.”

   By summer 2012, Fredinburg was ready for his next adventure. He
   and Battelli planned to scale Mt. Kilimanjaro that
   July—Africa’s highest peak, and the easiest of the Seven
   Summits to climb. Fredinburg even invited his younger
   half-sister, Megan Ezell, to join them, convincing her that it
   would be good for her college application. She agreed, and
   celebrated with the team by joining in a dance party once they
   reached the summit, watching as her brother jumped around in an
   orange “Pokey” cartoon character costume.

   IFRAME:
   s=1&autohide=2&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&wmode=t
   ransparent


   So when Florian “Flo” Nagl, an online sales manager based in
   Google’s Dublin office—and arguably the best mountaineer in the
   company—sent out a message through the internal network asking
   if anyone wanted to join him in climbing Mt. Elbrus, the
   highest peak in Europe, Fredinburg and Battelli responded “yes”
   immediately. “In climbing terms [Kilimanjaro] is not a
   mountain, it’s a hike,” says Nagl. “Mt. Elbrus and Aconcagua
   are different; they require proper mountaineering. On these two
   mountains if you make a wrong decision it can be fatal.”

   Two other Googlers also opted in. At the last minute Battelli
   couldn’t make it, but the others continued with their plans. In
   August 2012, after a few days of partying, instigated by
   Fredinburg, the four trekked up Elbrus.

   It was brutal. One of the Googlers turned around early due to
   frostbite. For Fredinburg it was so physically and
   psychologically grueling that Nagl tied a leash around him and
   carried him the last 100 meters to the summit. “He had no
   orientation anymore, he was so altitude sick,” recalls Nagl,
   who is several inches shorter and has a slimmer frame. “On the
   summit he sank down. I got the [StreetView] equipment ready and
   told him to push the right buttons, and we got the collection
   in.”

   Fredinburg later joked about the experience on Facebook: “It
   didn’t feel badass,” he wrote to a friend. “It felt like I was
   absolutely going to die.”

   But the difficulty didn’t deter him. Instead, he was thrilled
   to have found such an experienced mountaineer in Nagl for his
   Seven Summits quest, and invited him to join the Google
   Adventures Team. He, Nagl and Battelli would go on to style
   themselves “the Three Musketeers.”

   “I’m the project manager,” Fredinburg told Nagl. “I’m the
   politician. I need someone on the ground to make sure it
   becomes a success. If one day we get to Everest I’ll make it
   happen, and you make sure we get to the summit.”

   The boy from rural Arkansas had come a long way. But he was
   about to take his skills to a whole new level. And once again
   his friend Alex Abelin would be the one to [30]unlock the door.



