Creating Momentum Through Communicating Mathematics

   Posted on [18]October 17, 2016 by [19]Ben Braun


   By Matthias Beck, San Francisco State University, and Brandy
   Wiegers, Central Washington University

   Given five minutes, can you turn to the person next to you and
   describe your research? How about over 15 minutes in front of a
   class of 10th graders? Thinking of one of your research
   graduate students, how would you prepare her/him to make such
   an activity equally beneficial for her/him and the 10th
   graders? For many of us, these are skills only nurtured through
   conference talks and time within the profession. The
   [20]SF-State[21] (CM)²: San Francisco State University Creating
   Momentum through Communicating Mathematics program worked to
   change this, creating a program that developed mathematics
   graduate students who could have this conversation and were
   better engaged in why they were studying mathematics and what
   role they wanted to have in the future of our profession. As an
   [22]NSF GK-12 program, (CM)^2 ran from 2009-2014, working with
   master’s level students in mathematics to engage them in
   mathematical discourse while also supporting their research and
   professional development. Over the course of the five-year
   program, a total of 43 SF State mathematics graduate students
   were involved in the project, spending considerable time and
   energy on K-12 activities in 13 schools in the greater San
   Francisco area. A key goal was to strengthen the graduate
   students’ communication, teaching, outreach, and teamwork
   skills by immersing them in mathematics classrooms and the San
   Francisco Math Circle. A second key goal was to make
   mathematics, especially algebra, and its career connections
   more relevant and explicit for 6-12th grade teachers and
   students. This post will share successes, lessons learned, and
   resources for you as a faculty member to build aspects of
   outreach, teaching, and professional development programs for
   your own students.


   (CM)^2 provided funding support for nine Ph.D.-bound graduate
   students per year, with the understanding that these students
   (the “Fellows”) would work 10 hours per week in an
   education-related environment. A lot of work went into
   preparing these students for that experience, with a year-long
   schedule starting with bi-weekly summer workshops focused on
   research and applying for Ph.D. programs, culminating in a
   two-week intensive training to prepare graduate students for
   the classroom. We reinforced the lessons from the summer
   throughout the year with weekly graduate student meetings and
   larger monthly meetings of graduate students with their partner
   K-12 teachers. Our goal was to ensure that the graduate
   students spent the summer focused on making research progress
   prior to the intensive school-year schedule. The partner
   teachers attended the second half of the two-week training,
   meeting their mentor students and starting to create lessons
   and schedules for the upcoming year.

   At the first workshop, (CM)^2 Fellows were asked to turn and
   explain their research to the student sitting next to them.
   Their goal was to prepare a lesson for middle/high school age
   students to help them learn about the graduate student’s
   research, and the first step in this process was to describe
   their work to a colleague at the same academic level. This was
   a struggle, as everything you might expect happened with the
   biggest issue being Fellows’ use of precise language specific
   to their area of research. They were so focused on showing how
   much they knew about their field that they failed to
   concentrate on communicating their work in context. When first
   presented with the exercise, the Fellows struggled, but with
   practice their explanations were more prepared for a K-12
   classroom. From there we scaffolded the progression by having
   the graduate students explain their work to their mentor
   teachers, whom they would be spending the majority of their
   classroom work time with. This mentor team then worked for
   several workshop days to create a 15-minute sample lesson to
   share with the group of 9 mentorship teams. With feedback from
   the other graduate student and teachers, they worked over the
   next year to create grade-level appropriate mathematics
   activities that were related to their academic research. Over
   the year, the Fellows further developed these into 5-10 page
   lesson plans with an introduction to the mathematical content,
   an overview of the lesson structure and directions for
   implementation, worksheets, and a summary of how the lesson
   went, including recommendations for the future. These
   mathematics lessons were developed, shared between partnership
   teams, and papers to accompany them were posted online; you can
   still see many of these lessons at
   lesson into such a report furthered the Fellows’ mathematical
   communications skills with writing practice.


   Creating this lesson plan wasn’t the only aspect of the (CM)^2
   program. Once classes started, the graduate students quickly
   fell into a routine of weekly commitments, which included 10
   hours of GK-12 student interaction (in class and at Math
   Circle), a one-hour GK-12 seminar, their own coursework and
   research, and continued work on their Ph.D. applications.
   Several of the fellows completed NSF graduate research
   fellowship proposal (GRFP) applications while participating in
   the fellowship program.

   [24]San Francisco Math Circle (SFMC) was key to the success of
   the (CM)^2 program, providing the ideal stepping stone for
   graduate students to get involved with mathematics activities
   for middle and high school students. The program had been set
   up so that the graduate students worked in some of the schools
   we were using for our satellite programs (including Mission
   High School, Thurgood Marshall Academic High School, Lowell
   High School, and June Jordan School for Equity). While in the
   classroom, the graduate students created a mentorship
   relationship with the younger students whom they encouraged
   individually to attend Math Circle. The graduate students then
   served as instructors at the high-school Math Circle programs.
   We believe this improved the quality of instruction at the
   high-schools programs because the graduate students had the
   opportunity to incorporate more of their research into their
   Math Circle presentations and were better able to moderate
   their presentations for the correct level of students based on
   their experience in the classrooms of the students they were
   working with. In addition, the (CM)^2 program sponsored nine
   teachers who were involved in the Math Circle. Overall,
   partnering with the (CM)^2 program helped SFMC address not only
   the challenges in maintaining the diversity of the students in
   the Circle, but also that of increasing the number of qualified
   teachers willing to participate in a Circle with the students.


   The dichotomy of our Fellows’ work, including both in-class and
   out-of-school Math Circle experiences, provided an informed
   balance that helped them become better mathematicians and
   teachers. The in-class work provided a model for how to work
   with students of this age, giving reinforcement to expectations
   of behavior and any aspects of student discipline. Here are
   three sample testimonies from Fellows that show the diversity
   of experiences and highlights this program provided for the
   participating graduate students:

     “I’m serious about becoming an educator. Readings and
     discussions in 728 were terrific, and I learned more about
     teaching from working with […] than I did last year teaching
     on my own. My work at […] and SFMC were more valuable to me
     than the paychecks..”

     “(CM)² has also enhanced my preparation to enter the Ph.D.
     programs. Being in this program has increased my confidence
     and excitement to start my Ph.D. program through the support
     from Matt and Brandy as well as the teachers and other
     fellows. In addition, the financial support has opened up
     opportunities by removing financial barriers […] As an
     underrepresented minority, this program has given me so much
     in terms of academic support, encouragements, and resources.
     Through (CM)², I have become more aware of the low numbers
     of underrepresented minorities in higher education and I’m
     ecstatic to be a role model to others.”

     “In all honesty, I was not interested in working in the high
     school or in math circle to begin with but obviously took
     this fellowship for financial and moral support. Now, I’m
     looking sadly at the end of my time working at […] High and
     with […] and […] and the other teachers. I’ve learned so
     much, even if I never teach again, well, I may start up my
     own math circle someday, but even if I don’t, it has been a
     very personally rewarding experience.”

   The out-of-school work provided creative outlets for the
   graduate students to discuss their research and higher level
   mathematics that didn’t need to be connected to curriculum
   goals or other K-12 benchmarks. We also saw success reflected
   in comments we received from partner teachers:

     “Having another person in the room with deep math knowledge
     is good for the students and definitely helps with the
     amount of material covered. As to my pedagogy, I’m sure it
     has had an effect but I haven’t tried to define what it is.
     It has caused me to think more about what engages the
     students. I tend to push moving through the concepts, but
     now I am thinking more about ways to get the students
     involved. I don’t believe this necessarily has to be a show
     of how the concepts are relevant to the students lives.
     Coming up with intriguing problems where the students don’t
     feel shut out and turn off because of prior assumptions of
     them having a particular skill set seems to work well. Just
     having someone for me to interact with intellectually has
     been good, and I think it will help in improving course
     content.”

     “Having another pair of knowledgeable eyes in the classroom
     has pushed me to think about and to be able to articulate
     what my motives and intentions are for each lesson. […] is
     always thinking beyond the math concept to its
     implementation and I have benefited from his sharing his
     insights. Also, the students love it when we come up with
     different interpretations on a topic.”

   Our GK-12 program provided us with an invaluable opportunity to
   create a community of scholars, from elementary students to
   university faculty — vertical integration at its best. Working
   with our graduate students, their partner teachers, and their
   K-12 students was both great fun and an interesting challenge;
   everyone could learn something from the other participants (and
   that most certainly included us). We are somewhat heartbroken
   that the NSF cut the overall GK-12 program. The impact of our
   program went beyond the students; e.g., the San Francisco State
   mathematics department continues to offer a graduate-level
   writing-in-the-discipline course, which was initially developed
   as part of (CM)^2. Some of our current graduate students
   continue to be involved in the San Francisco Math Circle,
   including teaching and leadership positions. We hope we’ve
   inspired you to bring an aspect of this or a similar program
   into your work and encourage you to contact us for further
   information. Finally, we thank the graduate students and
   teachers who we worked with for their contributions and support
   of our program.

   This entry was posted in [25]Classroom Practices, [26]Graduate
   Education, [27]K-12 Education, [28]Outreach, [29]Research,
   [30]Student Experiences and tagged [31]GK-12, [32]graduate
   students, [33]math circle, [34]NSF, [35]outreach. Bookmark the
   [36]permalink.
   [37]← Conventional Courses are Not Enough for Future High
   School Teachers
   [38]On What Authority? – Considering Implicit Messages in Our
   Teaching →



