Segment Transcript

   IRA FLATOW: That noise, that noise can mean only one thing, and
   that means our Science Club is back in session. And it’s a good
   time for it, because tomorrow is National Citizen Science Day.
   And we have the return of our Science Club back with a new
   project for you to try and our Science Club founders Ariel Zych
   and Charles Bergquist here. Welcome back.

   ARIEL ZYCH: Hello.

   IRA FLATOW: What are we working on this month?

   ARIEL ZYCH: This month we’re asking all of you listeners to
   answer a question about something by sampling it.

   IRA FLATOW: Sampling it.

   ARIEL ZYCH: Sampling it. We want you to take a sample. So this
   is the take a sample Science Club. We want you to actually use
   a tiny portion of a thing to understand a larger phenomenon.
   It’s something that scientists do all the time.

   IRA FLATOW: Charles, you want to compound on that?

   CHARLES BERGQUIST: Yes. So we’ve got a little challenge for
   you, Ira, here.

   IRA FLATOW: How about just a second, [INAUDIBLE]?

   CHARLES BERGQUIST: And, you know, because we know you might be
   getting a little hungry, we brought some snacks here.

   IRA FLATOW: Wow.

   CHARLES BERGQUIST: Here we go.

   IRA FLATOW: M&Ms, filling the vase with M&Ms.

   ARIEL ZYCH: I love that sound.

   CHARLES BERGQUIST: So your challenge, Ira, is was to tell me
   how many red M&Ms are in that jar.

   IRA FLATOW: Oh my goodness. I have no idea.

   CHARLES BERGQUIST: So this is something. You know, it’s a
   pretty big vase. And it’s a pretty big bag of M&Ms. And so it
   would be a real pain to have to go through and count all these
   one by one.

   IRA FLATOW: I volunteer to try and eat that.

   CHARLES BERGQUIST: Well, you can work on that on your time. But
   if we take a sample of it, maybe pull a random handful of, say,
   10 M&Ms, and see how many red ones there are in that handful,
   we’ll probably want to do that a couple times just to make sure
   that we didn’t randomly pull out some unrepresentative sample,
   where I happened to grab all yellow ones or something. But if
   you do that a couple times, you can then extrapolate and make
   judgments about what might be in the rest of the vase.

   IRA FLATOW: So if I wanted to figure out they were all
   different colored M&Ms in there and how many were yellow, how
   many were green, blue, I could take a sample of it?

   ARIEL ZYCH: You got it.

   IRA FLATOW: And that’s what you’re asking our listeners to do?

   ARIEL ZYCH: Exactly.

   IRA FLATOW: Not just with M&Ms, but anything they wanted to?

   ARIEL ZYCH: Anything you’re curious about. So if you’ve got a
   question about the world around you, if you got a question
   about the world inside you, frankly, samples are the way to get
   at that question. What’s terribly cool about sampling is that
   you don’t actually need to count all the stuff or observe
   everything. You can take a sample and answer a question that
   otherwise would just be way too difficult or way too hard to
   observe exhaustively.

   So for example, most of you guys have probably already sampled
   things in your lifetime without realizing you were doing it. If
   you’ve gone to the grocery store and you pick up a melon and
   you’re trying to figure out if that’s a good melon, you have a
   sense about what’s a good melon by this point, Ira, right?

   IRA FLATOW: Absolutely.

   ARIEL ZYCH: So that’s because every time you’ve gone to the
   store and picked out a melon, you’ve looked at that melon and
   tried to figure out, from that one melon sample, what makes a
   delicious melon? So you’ve been sampling, and you use that
   sample to figure out more about the melons of the world.

   IRA FLATOW: I’m Ira Flatow. This is Science Friday from PRI
   Public Radio International. Here with our Science Club, Ariel
   Zych and Charles Bergquist, talking about this month’s
   challenge is sampling. And yes, you’re right, we have all in
   our lifetimes started to sample on this, but this time you want
   us to do it systematically.

   CHARLES BERGQUIST: We want you to pick out something in the
   world that you’re curious about that would take a lot of work
   to figure out in a straightforward manner. How many hairs are
   on my dog?

   ARIEL ZYCH: Your poor dog.

   CHARLES BERGQUIST: You can’t count that.

   ARIEL ZYCH: It would be terrible.

   CHARLES BERGQUIST: Maybe you want to know something about the
   way traffic goes past your house.

   IRA FLATOW: Oh, so you could sample something in time rather
   than objects.

   CHARLES BERGQUIST: Rather than sit there all day for an entire
   week and count every single car that goes by your house, you
   could tell yourself I’m going to take a picture of the
   intersection every half hour. And yeah, it’s not going to be a
   perfect representation of it, but it will let you arrive at
   some estimates and make some conclusions about what the rest of
   the whole might be like.

   IRA FLATOW: So you can sample how many Chevy, Fords, and Teslas
   go by in 10 minutes and see how many you think might go by
   during the day or so.

   ARIEL ZYCH: You’ve got it. And you’re probably going to figure
   out, as you guys have inferred, that maybe it depends on where
   you sample or how you sample what kind of answer you’re going
   to get. So the number of Teslas that drive past your house
   might be different in different parts of the country than
   another.

   IRA FLATOW: Now that’s for sure.

   ARIEL ZYCH: I mean, similarly like if you wanted to go, say,
   weigh the average mass of a dog, Charles, right?

   CHARLES BERGQUIST: Yeah, you wouldn’t go to the Great Dane club
   owners meeting or something like that.

   ARIEL ZYCH: Or go to chihuahuas anonymous, like that would not
   be a way to get an unbiased sample of, you know, dog mass. So
   then take your sampling protocol into consideration. Think very
   critically as you answer your question with sampling.

   IRA FLATOW: Are we aiming this at anybody, everybody?

   ARIEL ZYCH: Everybody and everybody.

   IRA FLATOW: Teachers, students.

   ARIEL ZYCH: Teachers.

   IRA FLATOW: Scientists?

   ARIEL ZYCH: Scientists. Yes, scientists, especially. Scientists
   send us your sweaty weird field sampling photos and tell us
   what you were doing with those field samples. If you’re a lab
   and you have samples as part of your lab and you do work on
   tissue samples or animal samples, whatever your thing is, tell
   us about it. Because we want to see how you use sampling, and
   then we want everybody else to go try it themselves.

   IRA FLATOW: And do we have any rules to follow?

   ARIEL ZYCH: There are some rules I would recommend following.
   So please be lawful in your pursuits. Be respectful. Don’t go
   trampling and sampling in private property. Try to sample
   things with their consent, which is code for, like, please
   don’t accost animals or other living organisms and don’t ruin
   them. But actually, otherwise, it’s pretty open.

   IRA FLATOW: And how do they communicate with us about their
   sample?

   CHARLES BERGQUIST: So we’re taking submissions online in all
   kinds of social ways. We’re on Twitter. We’re on Facebook.
   We’re on Instagram. Our hashtag for the project is take a
   sample. And you can find complete directions on all the ways
   that you can get in touch with us on our website at
   sciencefriday.com/scienceclub.

   ARIEL ZYCH: You got it.

   CHARLES BERGQUIST: Can they send us little videos of what
   they’re doing?

   ARIEL ZYCH: Please do. I would love sampling videos. That’d be
   awesome. I want to see what you sampled. I want to know what
   question you’re trying to answer with your sample. I want the
   nitty-gritty, no matter how ambitious or how subdued. It if you
   just want to know, you know, how many hairs on your dog, I
   mean, that’s a cool sample question.

   CHARLES BERGQUIST: And because in science failure is always an
   option. We’d like to see if you know how well you’re doing
   stuff, because we learn from failure.

   ARIEL ZYCH: Absolutely. And I’ve had my time with some bad
   sampling in my day. I mean, there are some people that have to
   sample some really unfortunate things, like people who study
   scat go into the field and they study the samples left by
   animals. And it’s an incredibly powerful way to learn about
   animal ecology and foraging patterns. It might not be glorious,
   but it is informative.

   CHARLES BERGQUIST: And you know, if you’re a professional and
   you do this all the time, yes, we know that there’s a lot of
   hoops that you have to jump through to make your sample to be
   statistically relevant and make those numbers actually tell you
   an accurate story. And so if you’re a pro, please tell us how
   you’re doing that too.

   IRA FLATOW: That’s great. And we’ll meet back here May 13 in a
   month?

   ARIEL ZYCH: Yes. You have a whole month to do some sampling.
   Check out our website. We’ve got even more projects that you
   can sample with as part of Citizen Science Day, thanks to
   SciStarter.

   IRA FLATOW: There you go. That’s our project for the month.
   Ariel Zych and Charles Bergquist, thank you.

   ARIEL ZYCH: Awesome. Thanks a lot.

   CHARLES BERGQUIST: Thanks, Ira.

   Copyright © 2016 Science Friday Initiative. All rights
   reserved. Science Friday transcripts are produced on a tight
   deadline by 3Play Media. Fidelity to the original
   aired/published audio or video file might vary, and text might
   be updated or amended in the future. For the authoritative
   record of ScienceFriday’s programming, please visit the
   original aired/published recording. For terms of use and more
   information, visit our policies pages at



