Guest Author: Andrea McNally

   Anyone involved in the discipline of math can most likely
   recall one, if not multiple, instances of being questioned on
   the usefulness of math. Eduardo Saenz de Cabezon addresses this
   question in his TED talk “Math is fore[20] Andrea
   McNally_925512_assignsubmission_file_cartoon pic ver” (which
   can be found [21]here). He claims there are three types of
   responses. First, the attacking one, which states math has a
   meanings all its own without the need for application. Next is
   the defensive one, which replies math is behind everything from
   bridge building to credit card numbers. The third response is
   where Eduardo claims math’s utility stems from its ability to
   control intuition, thus making it eternal.


   Is math forever? Eduardo seems to think so stating diamonds
   aren’t forever, a theorem is. Mathematicians spend their lives
   generating conjectures and searching for ways to prove them.
   Once a conjecture is proven true though, it becomes a theorem,
   [22]Andrea McNally_925512_assignsubmission_file_blogpostpic 1
   which is a truth that will remain so forever. Therefore,
   concepts such as the Pythagorean Theorem and the Honeycomb
   Theorem will forever be true, regardless of whether or not we
   are here to acknowledge it. This idea is rooted from Platonism,
   which is the philosophical view that there are abstract math
   objects that exist independently from our thoughts. Thus, all
   math truths are waiting to be discovered and not invented.


   There are two main contributors in the world of mathematical
   philosophy. The first is German mathematician David Hilbert
   (pictured to the left), creator of Hilbert’s Program. He
   claimed that all math is formulized in axiomatic form with a
   proof to accompany it; it is done so by using finitary methods
   only which gives proper justification for classical mathematic
   problems. Hilbert believed theories could be developed without
   the need for intuition and would generate a set of rules and
   axioms that are consistent so one cannot prove an assertion as
   well as its opposite. Hilbert, like Eduardo, believed the
   capabilities of math were limitless.

   Hilbert’s work, in turn, inspired the work of Kurt Gӧdel
   [23]Andrea McNally_925512_assignsubmission_file_blogpostpic 2
   (pictured right) and his Incompleteness Theorems. Gӧdel proved
   that Hilbert’s concept of a decision procedure that generates
   axioms cannot be possible; there will always be conjectures
   that need a proof that may not actually exist. Gӧdel’s first
   incompleteness theorem proved that math knowledge cannot be
   specifically summed up and identified. Even the soundest basic
   rules will have statements about numbers that can’t be
   verified. It is important to note however, that Gӧdel never had
   the intention of disproving Hilbert’s program but rather to
   offer a new view.


   So this leaves the math community open to explore if math is
   created or exists regardless of human recognition. If a tree
   falls in the woods when no one is around, does it make a sound?
   If no one has been able to prove a conjecture, does that
   theorem still exist? Like many schools of thought, there is
   ambiguity and uncertainty. As an individual in the math
   community, we all are responsible for looking into the
   information and opinions and coming to our own conclusions. Yet
   one thing remains certain, intuition and creativity
   are absolutely essential in mathematics.

   Sources:
   de Cabezon, Eduardo Saenz. “Math is Forever.” TED. TED, Oct.
   2014. Web. 05 Apr. 2016.
   Elwes, Richard. “Ultimate Logic. (Cover Story).” New Scientist.
   211.2823 (2011): 30-33. Academic Search Complete. Web. 4 Apr.
   2016
   Linnebo, Oystein. “Platonism in the Philosophy of Mathematics.”
   Stanford University. Stanford University, 18 July 2009. Web. 05
   Apr. 2016.
   Peterson, Ivars. “The Limits of Mathematics.” Science News.
   Society for Science & the Public, 2 Mar. 2006. Web. 5 Apr.
   2016.
   Zach, Richard. “Hilbert’s Program.” Stanford University.
   Stanford University, 31 July 2003. Web. 05 Apr. 2016.

   Image 1 retrieved from:
   Image 2 retrieved from:
   Image 3 retrieved from:
   s



