Most Popular

    1. [50]The Myth of the Kindly General Lee


    2. [52]What Trump Doesn't Understand About Gun Control in
       Great Britain


    3. [54]My Family’s Slave


    4. [56]The Panic President


    5. [58]What ISIS Really Wants









           mailto:?subject=Apeirophobia: The Fear of Eternity&body=Which is scarier, death or everlasting life?

       Text Size


   The first time I thought about heaven, it terrified me.

   I was 4 years old, and my grandfather had just passed away
   after a drawn-out battle with cancer. My family tried to
   console me by explaining that he went to a beautiful, calm, and
   happy place, where he would be united with all his loved ones,
   forever and ever.

   That night, I lay in bed in pitch darkness and tried to grasp
   what they had told me. But every time I thought I had a grip on
   eternity, it slipped further away. The largest number of years
   I could imagine failed to make a dent in infinity. My primitive
   brain filled with an existential angst. The idea of living
   forever was even more unsettling than the idea of no longer
   existing after death.

   Woody Allen once said, “Eternity is a very long time,
   especially toward the end!” Eternity sounds great on the
   surface, but actually experiencing it may be an entirely
   different matter. For some people, the very notion of infinity
   sends chills up the spine. In fact, for many who suffer from
   “apeirophobia”—a term for the fear of eternity—the thought of
   an existence that goes on forever amounts to torture.

   “I remember the first time it hit me,” [67]writes Kellie, the
   username of an anonymous commenter on the pop culture website
   [68]YOMYOMF, which featured a brief story about an actor’s
   experience with apeirophobia . “I was around 8 years old. Now
   I’m in my 30s, and the thought of eternity still freaks me out.
   It usually hits at night when I’m trying to sleep. I’ve learned
   to push it out of my mind, but sometimes I can’t, and when that
   happens I start pacing the room and thinking that I might have
   to go to the emergency room or else I might kill myself.”
   “The thought of the distance between galaxies is unbearable.”


   Search for apeirophobia on Google and you’ll find hundreds, if
   not thousands, of message-board posts and comments similar to
   this on popular Internet forums like [69]Reddit, [70]Quora, and
   [71]Yahoo! Answers. Websites dedicated to phobia help and
   support, such as [72]Phobia Fear Release and [73]MedHelp, all
   have comment threads on apeirophobia, too. On these sites,
   Apeirophobes share experiences and swap advice. Even though
   most describe dealing with unrelenting anxiety, many seem
   comforted by knowing they aren’t alone.


   Despite all this discussion, there is so little research on
   apeirophobia that it lacks its own Wikipedia entry. It is not
   explicitly recognized by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
   of Mental Disorders, the American Psychiatric Association’s
   standard reference for psychiatry, but it does meet their
   criteria for a “specific phobia,” which is classified as an
   anxiety disorder. It is included on many sites with informal
   phobia lists, but it is absent from the websites of the Mayo
   Clinic and the National Institute of Mental Health, as well as
   WebMD. A Google Scholar search doesn’t yield a single
   quantitative study on the phobia.

   Grasping for some sense of its prevalence, I posted on
   Facebook, asking if anyone had experience with apeirophobia. I
   received considerably more responses than expected. One friend
   said that he used to get so overwhelmed during sermons in early
   adolescence that he felt physically sick. Another wrote, “The
   thought of eternity still fills me with anxiety when I wake up
   from naps. My solution: I stopped napping.”

   Where does this fear come from? A realization that an eternal
   afterlife could become infinitely repetitive? The recognition
   that one lacks control over their own destiny?

   Martin Wiener, a former colleague of mine at George Mason
   University who researches the neural underpinnings of time
   perception, notes that the brain region hypothesized to control
   [74]long-term planning, the frontal lobe, is one of the last to
   develop in humans as they grow. “In adolescence, there is a
   dawning realization that occurs where one realizes they will
   become an adult,” Wiener says. “I suspect that, in
   apeirophobia, one comes to the ‘realization’ that after death
   you will live forever (if you believe this), and in simulating
   that experience in your mind, one realizes that there is no way
   to project ahead to ‘forever’—and that experience is,
   inherently, anxiety-provoking. As such, the anxiety that these
   folks are feeling may not be much different than the fear of
   growing up, getting old, or death.”
   “Terror Management Theory … essentially says people … are all
   walking around in denial of our mortality.”


   Maybe human brains, as finite instruments with limited
   cognitive and computational capacities, are flat-out not
   hardwired to have a conception of something completely absent
   from sensory experience. Evolution has done just fine without
   organisms that contemplate infinity, after all. Doing so
   wouldn’t have likely offered any survival advantages to
   pre-modern humans.

   Wiener’s explanation would predict that apeirophobia creeps up
   in younger stages of life, and although we cannot know anything
   for sure without sufficient data, the reports scattered across
   the web seem to roughly match this concept. But there does seem
   to be a small percentage of people with apeirophobia who first
   experienced fear even before adolescence, such as myself. For
   that, Wiener offers a different—but likely compatible—idea
   regarding the phenomenon: What if a fear of the afterlife is
   simply a religious manifestation of a fear of death that’s
   innate in everyone?

   “Terror Management Theory, which is derived from Ernest
   Becker’s 1973 Pulitzer Prize-winning work of philosophy and
   psychology The Denial of Death, essentially says people in
   modern civilization are all walking around in denial of our
   mortality—and that culture, religion, and entertainment all
   exist for the purpose of distraction,” Wiener explains. “The
   idea is that these things keep us from thinking about our own
   deaths, and that systematically, people are repressing this
   fear. The fear of eternity could just be that same fear
   manifesting itself in a different way.”

   There shouldn’t be too many atheists who fear of eternity,
   since they reject the idea of an afterlife, Wiener says. But
   that doesn’t mean that those who aren’t religious are immune to
   existential anxiety. Infinity, after all, doesn’t pertain only
   to time; it can also apply to space. “I feel that we are all
   insignificant compared to the universe,” wrote Jamie Adkins, a
   nurse and longtime friend of mine, in response to my Facebook
   post. “When I start to think beyond our solar system, it is as
   if my thoughts automatically stop to protect myself from having
   some form of a panic attack. The knowledge of black holes will
   give me nightmares for days. The thought of the distance
   between galaxies is unbearable.”

   She likened the experience to Horton Hears a Who. “We are on
   this tiny flower and can be blown away any second.”

   It’s an age-old anxiety. In the 17th century, the French
   mathematician and philosopher Blaise Pascal described in
   Pensées, how both infinite space and time shook him to the
   core: “When I consider the short duration of my life, swallowed
   up in the eternity before and after, the little space which I
   fill, and even can see, engulfed in the infinite immensity of
   spaces of which I am ignorant, and which know me not, I am
   frightened, and am astonished at being here rather than there;
   for there is no reason why here rather than there, why now
   rather than then.”

   Bilbo Baggins, burdened with unusually long life thanks to the
   almighty ring in Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings, put it this
   way: “I feel thin, sort of stretched, like butter scraped over
   too much bread.”

   Although some apeirophobics have benefitted from treatments
   like medication and cognitive behavioral therapy, others have
   found no way to mitigate the existential terror. Personally,
   I’m no better at grasping infinity than I was at 4. But rather
   than trying to comprehend eternity, now I just avoid the
   thought altogether.





