A Q&A with Wonder Women author Sam Maggs

   by [67]Alessandra Potenza[68]@ale_potenza Mar 8, 2017, 9:00am
   EST





   [Wonder_Women_Bessie_Coleman.0.jpg] Bessie Coleman, one of the
   wonder women featured in the book by Sam Maggs Illustration by
   [72]Sophia Foster-Dimino / Quirk Books


   Women’s contribution to history often gets overlooked in
   textbooks. Unless you took some women’s studies classes in
   college, you might think the whole world was built by men.
   That’s obviously not true. There have been many talented female
   scientists, engineers, and innovators who changed the world for
   the better. But because men dominated for an awfully long time,
   they got to shape and write history. That’s gradually beginning
   to change.

   If you want to read about some pretty awesome women who changed
   history, you should read [73]Wonder Women by Sam Maggs. I wish
   I had this book growing up in Italy, where women voted for the
   first time in 1946 (that’s not even 100 years ago!) and being
   catcalled on the street is as common as spotting a historical
   monument (very common!). It would have just made imagining any
   future — whatever I wanted to be growing up — much easier.
   Photo: Quirk Books


   Wonder Women is a collection of stories of 25 women doctors,
   mathematicians, spies and forgers, writers, soldiers,
   inventors, and other pioneers in STEM, not just in the United
   States but all over the world. [74]Maggs, a video game writer
   and author, made a particular effort to include women from all
   backgrounds and races, to get the point across that all women
   deserve recognition for their work.


   Not only were these women just as capable as — if not more
   capable than — their fellow men, they also had to overcome
   incredible obstacles, like parents who didn’t want them to go
   to school, laws that kept them from performing their job, and
   male colleagues who stole their inventions and the credit. It’s
   a great little book to keep on your desk to remind yourself
   that even though [75]you’re probably paid less than a man for
   the same amount of work, and [76]men interrupt you while you’re
   talking, you can do whatever you set your mind to!


   In celebration of International Women’s Day, The Verge spoke
   with Maggs about how Wonder Women came to be, why it’s
   important to have female role models in STEM, and whether the
   tide is finally changing.

   This interview has been edited for clarity and brevity.

   How did you come up with the idea for Wonder Women?

   I’ve always really been interested in women’s historical
   stories. I did my master’s degree in a particular subset of
   Victorian literature called Sensation Fiction, which was
   basically about women behaving badly. When I wrote my first
   book, [77]The Fangirl’s Guide to the Galaxy, it was all about
   women being marginalized in the geek culture and pop culture
   fields and how to sort of embrace that. From there, it seemed
   sort of a natural progression to move into the STEM field.
   "all women deserve recognition for their work"


   I work in video game development full time now, and tech and a
   lot of the science industry still has a pretty big gender gap
   in terms of people who work there. I think part of the reason
   that that’s true is because of a real lack of role models for
   women in these fields. I thought it’d be really interesting to
   combine that need for role models with my interest in women and
   history, and hopefully bring some of these women to the
   forefront, and hopefully inspire some girls and women to get
   into the fields that they’re passionate about.

   How did you choose the women featured in the book?

   It was really difficult, to be honest with you. We only ever
   hear about basically the same two women: [78]Marie Curie and
   [79]Ada Lovelace. It’s like, “you have those, so you’re fine.”
   But once you start researching it, there are actually so many
   women whose accomplishments have been lost to time, or the
   credit was taken by their male colleagues, or in some cases
   they intentionally gave away the credit. Great examples of this
   are black women at the turn of the 20th century who were
   inventors, often didn’t want their names attributed to their
   work because they were afraid that if white people found out
   that a black person invented it, they wouldn’t buy the
   invention. So, there’s a lot of stories lost to time for a
   variety of different reasons, and we’re just starting to
   realize how many of them there really are.


   In terms of narrowing it down to just the 25 larger ones in the
   book, for me the priority was diversity. Because a lot of the
   time, when we start covering these stories, we tend to focus
   only on white Western women, which there are many of [them] in
   the book also. But I thought it was really important to make
   sure that women who are particularly marginalized and
   underrepresented in these fields — women of color and queer
   women particularly — could also see themselves represented on
   the page. I really wanted to make sure to include women from
   India and Japan and China and all over, so that we really got
   all different kinds of perspectives and stories from around the
   world.
   Author Sam Maggs. Photo by Ashley Walker

   The book is filled with quirky facts about these women. What
   was your research process, and how hard was it to find
   information about them?

   It was actually really difficult. Basically, one of the very
   first things that I learned was that Wikipedia is full of lies.
   It’s a very interesting place to start if you’re casually
   looking for information on people, but once you start to dig
   into the source material, you find that a lot of the “facts” on
   Wikipedia are really unreliable. So I actually spent a lot of
   time hunting down primary sources. I was very lucky to have
   help from librarians and various historians all over the world,
   who sent me original writing by these women, original newspaper
   articles, original papers, in some cases original paintings,
   scans of things — just to make sure that I had all the accurate
   information.

   One website that I used that I really liked is called
   [80]Chronicling America. Basically, it’s an online archive
   that’s digitized all the newspapers across America going back
   to the 1800s. So if you want to know what was going on in your
   community on a Wednesday in 1860, you can go onto this website
   and read the paper from that day. It’s really fascinating
   because you can find all these hidden stories and unknown facts
   and frankly hilarious advertisements from that time. That’s a
   really super interesting resource that I encourage people to
   check out.


   What do these women have in common?

   I think there are two major trends: one of the unfortunate
   trends throughout the book was often times women didn’t receive
   credit for the work that they did because it was taken or
   attributed to their male colleagues, or because they either
   took the credit intentionally or the public wasn’t willing to
   believe that women were capable of that kind of thought or
   invention or knowledge. They were much more likely to go, “Oh,
   their boss must have done it! She can’t do that!” That was one
   of the most unfortunate and sort of frustrating themes that I
   found throughout the book, which is why I tried to keep the
   book sort of light and humorous in as many cases as I could. It
   definitely was one of those if-you-don’t-laugh-you’ll-cry
   situations.
   "“It definitely was one of those if-you-don’t-laugh-you’ll-cry
   situations.”"

   The other theme that I found throughout the book that actually
   was really inspiring is women helping women. All throughout
   history, overwhelmingly, the way that women have succeeded in
   any of these fields, was to be supported by female friends and
   family members and their community. I think one of my favorite
   examples of this is Amandibai Joshi, who was the Indian girl in
   the 1880s that ended up coming to America and becoming the
   first Indian person in America at all, and the first Indian
   woman, to get a degree in Western medicine. And she was able to
   do so because she became pen pals with a young widow in New
   Jersey, named Theodicia Carpenter, who brought her over and
   they lived together. And the two of them were assisted by the
   Dean of the Women’s Medical College of Pennsylvania. So it was
   this big confluence of women helping women to have this great
   historical thing happen. [It] ended up actually benefiting
   India when she went back and was in charge of a hospital and
   opened a practice where she could train other women to become
   GPs. That was really inspiring to me.

   The book has a comic book vibe to it. Who’s your target
   audience?

   I originally wanted to write a book for women around my own
   age, mid 20s. But as I started writing it, I realized that this
   was a topic that could broadly benefit everyone, so I wanted to
   make it as accessible as possible, whether you’re 11 years old
   or 30 years old, a dude or a lady — whoever wants to get into
   this. That’s why I tried to make it look very approachable. I
   was very lucky to have it illustrated by [81]Sophia
   Foster-Dimino, who’s a Google doodler who has great little spot
   illustrations all over the book.
   One of the wonder women featured in the book, Mary Sherman
   Morgan. Illustration by Sophia Foster-Dimino / Quirk Books


   It’s also why I used a sort of humorous, lighter tone. A lot of
   the time when people think about biographies or think about
   textbooks, they think dry and dusty and boring. They are
   serious subjects and important topics, but it doesn’t mean you
   have to talk about them in a way that isn’t interesting. [I
   wanted to make] clear that, even though they did all these
   important things that are downright heroic when you look back
   at them, they were just people like us. A lot of the girls in
   this book were like 23 or 21 years old when they accomplished
   their big deeds. It was important to me to make them as
   relatable as possible.

   At the end of each section, you include a Q&A with a living
   wonder woman. Why is that?

   I really wanted to show girls and women reading the book that
   not only have women succeeded in these fields historically, but
   that there are still women in these fields who continue to be
   pioneering, successful women across the board in STEM — all
   kinds of women. And I really wanted to show that you also don’t
   have to feel relegated to be a doctor or a scientistic if this
   is the kind of thing you’re interested in. I wanted to
   highlight women in a variety of fields across STEM to show what
   kind of variety there really is in these jobs.
   "“they were just people like us.”"

   It was really cool talking to Lynn Conway who’s a trans woman,
   who’s also been an activist for trans women in STEM, as well as
   her career in microchip development. It was really cool talking
   to Mika McKinnon, who’s a science consultant on television
   shows; or Dr. Buddhini Samarasinghe, who’s a science
   communicator and makes science more fun to regular people who
   don’t understand science super well like me. I really wanted to
   highlight those women who are still paving the way and
   hopefully will show people that it’s totally doable. There are
   women doing these things right now, and you can be like them.

   Have you experienced discrimination or sexism yourself in your
   life?

   Sure. I’m lucky to work at a game company that prioritizes
   diversity and inclusion very strongly, but I think we see
   generally as a trend in gaming, in technology fields, something
   like only 13 percent of all game designers are women. When you
   look at the statistics of who works at Google and who works at
   Facebook, it is a startlingly low number of women and an even
   lower number of women of color. I think that across the board
   we’re starting to make a lot of progress in the right direction
   and the more we have conversations like this, the more that
   progress continues to be made. But it’s definitely an
   industry-wide issue in tech at the moment.

   There’s still a lot of systemic problems that we face in STEM
   fields, with getting girls into the fields, which just starts
   with a gender bias at a young age. When you look at gender toy
   isles, most of the boys’ toys are geared toward building and
   Lego and connects and that sort of stuff, and you don’t see
   that as much with girls’ toys. From a very young age, we
   already start to program these sorts of gender expectations
   into girls as to what they should get into, which is then where
   you see a real big disparity in how many girls are in computer
   science programs in college, which then translates to how many
   girls get into tech and game design and science after college.
   We really need to continue thinking about how we gender careers
   and education paths, and make all careers more accessible to
   all genders.
   One of the women women featured in the book, Ogino Ginko.
   Illustration by Sophia Foster-Dimino / Quirk Books

   Do you have a favorite wonder woman?

   I talked about Amandibai Joshi earlier. She’s definitely one of
   my favorites and I think another one of my favorites is Bessie
   Coleman, who was born to black and Native American parents in
   the American South in the 1890s, so a tough start to begin
   with. But she really wanted to prove that women of color could
   be incredibly successful, and when she was rejected from flight
   school in America because of her race and her gender, she
   taught herself French, moved to France, and got her pilot’s
   license two full years before Amelia Earhart. And when she
   returned to America she got super famous doing a lot of stunt
   shows all across the country, but she would only perform for
   crowds that weren’t segregated. So in addition to being
   incredibly successful in her field of aviation, she was also a
   real pioneer in terms of civil rights activism. So, she was
   pretty cool.

   Is the tide changing, you think? Are we finally recognizing
   women’s role in history?

   I think that there’s a real movement right now, that I think
   Wonder Women is a part of, that is sort of reclaiming this part
   of women’s history and advocating for women to get the credit
   they deserved all along. There’s a ton of books about women in
   history right now, and not just about science history, [but
   also] sport history, just across the board in terms of
   recognizing women’s accomplishments. And I really hope that
   Wonder Women is part of what put these women’s names back on
   the map, back into the discourse, and back into textbooks where
   they belong.
   "“They should follow their dreams, regardless of what people
   tell them.”"

   What do you want your readers to take away from this book?

   I want women and girls who read the book to know that they can
   do whatever they want to do, whatever they’re passionate about.
   They should follow their dreams, regardless of what people tell
   them they can’t do or what they shouldn’t do. You shouldn’t
   listen to that, and you should blaze your own trail and it may
   be difficult and awful and harder than it’s ever been
   throughout history, but just know that there are women
   supporting you and that you should do what you love and what
   makes you happiest in this world.


