One Response to Announcement: Active Learning Article in AMS Notices

    1. Brian Winkel says:
       [27]January 27, 2017 at 8:41 am
       We read and very much appreciated the confirming piece,
       “What Does
       Active Learning Mean for Mathematicians?” in the current
       issue of the
       Notices of the AMS. Congratulations on a work well done.
       While much of what the authors bring forward is “not new
       news,” the forum in
       which you offered it truly is NEW, namely the Notices of
       the AMS. The
       organization and presentation were very engaging, with rich
       illustrations to which readers could relate. As a former
       Editor (I
       founded the journal PRIMUS years ago) I appreciated the
       elegance in
       your writing and your narrative approach.
       As a long standing member of AMS – over 50 years and as
       well with MAA –
       I am so pleased to see the Society turning more and more of
       its
       publication pages to teaching (while still maintaining its
       strong and
       supportive efforts on research) the very mathematics which
       is the core
       of the research effort in mathematics. Indeed, a few weeks
       ago at the
       Joint Mathematics Meeting in Atlanta we offered an AMS
       Special Session
       on The Modeling First Approach to Teaching Differential
       Equations.
       This was one of the first such sessions the AMS offered
       which was
       solely devoted to teaching. We suffered the lack of
       attendance due to
       the weather “panic” that caused folks to leave Atlanta
       early, but we had
       reasonable attendance and some remarkable talks.
       I particularly appreciated the article’s words, “. . .
       lecturing in order to
       cover more material is not always effective for students.
       By exclusively
       considering course content coverage and responding to
       content coverage
       with telling, we risk forgetting the many other elements of
       student
       learning that active learning addresses, such as the
       cognitive goals for
       students outlined in the 2015 MAA CUPM Curriculum Guide.”
       The fear (in
       some case excuse) that faculty have for not using active
       learning that
       coverage will be lost is simply not supported.
       I have been in the active learning camp for years, indeed,
       once engaged
       in active learning there is a sort of guilt feeling that
       happens if one
       has to “drop back and punt” by going to lecture.
       Nevertheless, there are
       times when we need to just tell them so min-lectures are
       not plain bad.
       Years ago Kurt Bryan, a colleague at Rose-Hulman Institute
       of Technology
       in Terre Haute IN co-taught a differential equations course
       and we
       taught in very active mode, with in class modeling
       projects. On course
       end evaluations the students said essentially, “We really
       liked when you
       were `on’ and produced quality activities for us, but we
       did not like
       when you were not `on’ and lectured.” They can tell the
       difference and
       they know when they are engaging and learning. Hopefully,
       colleagues who
       read your piece and who try to engage in more active
       learning get good
       student feedback. However, Karl Smith of Purdue
       University’s Engineering
       Education program, told me years ago that it can take as
       much as 5 years
       to be proficient in active learning techniques, but he also
       said once
       there you will not go back to lecturing. So true!
       Now while I have your attention I want to share something
       we are working
       on now which is an ultimate active learning effort, namely,
       teaching
       differential equations using a modeling-first approach. We
       call it
       SIMIODE – Systemic Initiative for Modeling Investigations
       and
       Opportunities with Differential Equations. SIMIODE is about
       teaching
       differential equations using modeling and technology
       upfront and
       throughout the learning process. You can learn more at our
       dynamic
       website, www.simiode.org, where we offer a community in
       which colleagues
       can communicate, collaborate, publish, teach, explore,
       contribute, etc.
       Check us out.
       Finally and again, we should all thank and applaud the
       AUTHORS and THE Editors of the Notices of the AMS for this
       terrific piece.
       PS I was particularly impressed with the Middlebury images
       as my wife is
       a Midd grad!!!
       [28]Reply



