[11]Honoring the Nation’s Leading Science and Mathematics Teachers
and Announcing Active Learning Day


   [12]Cross-posted from the White House blog.


   Today the White House honored the 213 newest recipients of the
   Presidential Awards for Excellence in Mathematics and Science
   Teaching (PAEMST). Yesterday, these teachers, from all 50
   states, the District of Columbia, U.S. Territories, and the
   Department of Defense Education Activity, received their awards
   – the Nation’s highest honor for mathematics and science
   teachers – at a ceremony hosted by the National Science
   Foundation (NSF) and featuring the President’s Science Advisor,
   Dr. John Holdren.
   [13]Dr. John Holdren speaking the PAEMST ceremony on September
   8, 2016. (Credit: NSF)


   Dr. John Holdren speaking the PAEMST ceremony on September 8,
   2016. (Credit: NSF)

   In addition, the teachers met with U.S. Chief Technology
   Officer Megan Smith and Secretary of Energy Ernest Moniz, who
   congratulated the teachers for their ongoing commitment to
   supporting students from all background to participate in
   science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) learning.

   As part of the recognition activities honoring the PAEMST
   awardees, NSF and the Center for Innovative Research in
   Cyberlearning hosted an Active Learning in STEM Education
   Symposium, an event designed to give the teachers the
   opportunity to engage in activities and discussions with
   colleagues from across the country, share best practices, and
   explore ways to use active learning pedagogy in more classrooms
   nationwide to enable students to engage, think, and solve
   problems. The awardees were joined by math education innovators
   to focus part of the day’s conversation on the challenges
   specifically related to creating a community of math
   learners. So often, STEM education discussions do not
   explicitly address challenges in math, even though the
   mathematics-preparation gap is a known barrier to later success
   in STEM disciplines, limiting a student’s opportunities at a
   level below their aspirations.

   Building on yesterday’s activities as well as feedback from
   OSTP’s recent [14]Call to Action on Active Learning, OSTP is
   excited to announce a nationwide Active Learning Day on October
   25. On this day, STEM educators at all grade levels, from K-12
   through college and university, are encouraged to spend at
   least 10 minutes using an active learning technique in their
   classrooms. Implementing active learning can be as simple as
   using small group discussions for problem-solving, asking
   students to write down a question they have following a lesson,
   or allowing time for self-assessment and reflection by the
   students; it also can be as expansive as hands-on technology
   activities or engaging students in authentic scientific
   research or engineering design. In addition to participation by
   teachers, faculty, and students in the classroom that day,
   Active Learning Day will also provide a launching point for
   educators, administrators, and students to initiate local
   conversations about how to provide broader support for
   implementation of active-learning strategies in classrooms
   through the school year to engage the next generation of
   scientists, engineers, and innovators.


   In response to the Call to Action to incorporate active STEM
   learning strategies in classrooms, organizations and
   institutions already have committed to new actions and
   activities to support students and educators at all grade
   levels:

   K-12 Educator Support

   100Kin10, a national network of more than 280 organizations
   whose goal is to bring 100,000 new, excellent STEM teachers
   into schools by 2021, will organize all those in its network
   who prepare and develop K-12 STEM educators in a week of action
   on active STEM learning.

   Higher Education Faculty Support

   The American Association of Colleges & Universities (AAC&U) and
   its Project Kaleidoscope, will organize a national network of
   STEM faculty at US institutions of higher education who will
   implement culturally responsive, active STEM learning teaching
   strategies in their classrooms and coach colleagues on what
   they might do to implement similar strategies in their
   classrooms.

   Join us on Active Learning Day, or any day throughout the week,
   and use #ActiveLearningDay to tell us what you’re doing on
   October 25.

   To join in the effort and tell us what new and interesting
   actions you are doing in response to this important call to
   action. Please [15]submit this web form by September 23, 2016.


   Jo Handelsman is the Associate Director for Science in the
   White House Office of Science and Technology Policy

   Quincy Brown is a Senior Policy Advisor at the White House
   Office of Science and Technology Policy


