How to Understand Extreme Numbers

   Posted By Elizabeth Landau on Feb 17, 2017


      mailto:?subject=Nautilus: How to Understand Extreme Numbers&body=I saw this blog post on Nautil.us and wanted to share it with you.






   Galaxy collision | Illustration by NASA Goddard Space Flight
   Center / Flickr

   The late statistics wizard Hans Rosling, who died this month at
   age 68,  brought at least 10 toilet paper rolls to some of his
   beloved presentations.  He would stack them into a tower on a
   table, each roll representing one billion people. In a 2012
   [65]talk at the Skoll World Forum, he used the rolls to show
   how, as the number of children in the world—2 billion—holds
   steady, the global population will rise from 7 billion to the
   (also indefinitely stable) figure of about 10 billion. “We are
   debating peak oil,” he remarked, “but we know that we have
   reached peak child.”


   With his whimsical props and other colorful
   visualizations, Rosling was renowned as a translator between
   large, almost unfathomable numbers and the language of everyday
   experience. He understood that most of us need visualizations
   or analogies to mentally work with millions, billions, and
   other big powers of 10 that help define our world. They’re
   important for decisions that affect daily life, such as how
   money gets invested and which government policies you support.
   But just how well—or poorly—do people understand quantities in
   powers of 10? And how can we better equip ourselves to navigate
   them?

   In thinking about these questions, I started reading about a
   niche branch of science called numerical cognition. Researchers
   in this field study not just how we think, but how we think
   about, and with, numbers.
   [66][12139_c5c548e462f63499be7e59ff9f3d8e40.png]


   Not a lot of research has been done on how our minds perceive
   and comprehend large orders of magnitude—big differences
   between the size of, say, a cell and our sun. But one academic
   outwardly passionate about it is David Landy, assistant
   professor of psychological and brain sciences at Indiana
   University in Bloomington. Landy has done several studies on
   how well people understand very large numbers—namely, the
   millions, billions, and trillions—in relation to each other on
   a number line.

     “To me, the impressive thing is that people succeed at all.”

   Short answer: About half the people he studied were pretty bad
   with handling big numbers. In a 2013 [67]study, for example,
   Landy and colleagues did two experiments that involved
   estimating large numbers. The sample sizes weren’t huge, so
   there’s some uncertainty about generalizing the results, but
   they’re a start. They found that about half of participants did
   pretty well in locating numbers on a line in relation to 1
   million, 1 billion, etc. But about 35 percent of people in the
   study used what the authors call a “segmented linear
   heuristic.” That means they correctly distinguish between
   numbers within the millions or billions, but assume that
   “million,” “billion,” and “trillion” are equally spaced on a
   number line. They were generally great at comparing the
   relative sizes of numbers like 2 million and 800 million, but
   many treated 980 million and 2 billion as nearly identical.


   In other words, as long as you’re comparing numbers with the
   same “label” or unit of magnitude—“million” to “million”—you’re
   quite likely to do fine in estimating relative magnitude. But
   things fall apart for many in comparing big numbers with
   different labels—“million” to “billion.” Writing out one with
   six or nine zeroes doesn’t help any more than saying “million”
   or “billion,” either, Landy’s research has found. As for
   powers-of-10 notation like 10^6, it can lead to even more
   confusion, according to his unpublished work.

   Of course, our ancient human ancestors didn’t live among
   billions of people, or incur trillions of dollars of debt. The
   orders of magnitude in their immediate surroundings were
   limited to what they could experience firsthand. It’s not
   surprising that we can intuitively visualize a 6-inch or 6-mile
   distance, but 93 million miles to the sun seems…super far. So
   Landy sympathizes with people who don’t get all of the number
   line questions right. “To me, the impressive thing is that
   people succeed at all,” he said.

     “I probably have a better sense of what a solar mass (10^33
     grams) is than say an ounce!”

   That success is important because, as Landy’s studies have also
   found, making errors of judgment about large numbers can have a
   big impact on the way you view policies and government
   decisions. The rationale goes like this: The National Science
   Foundation [68]received $7.463 billion for fiscal year 2016
   through the Consolidated Appropriations Act. The [69]total
   United States budget outlay for 2016 was $3.54 trillion. If
   you’re someone who perceives the difference between a billion
   and a trillion as relatively small, you’d think the US is
   spending a lot of money on the National Science Foundation—in
   fact, depending on your politics, you might applaud the federal
   government’s investment or even think it wasteful. But, if you
   understand that a billion is a thousand times less than a
   trillion, you can calculate that the Foundation got a paltry
   0.2 percent of the budget outlay last year. (It may be more
   straightforward to think of the budget as roughly one-half to
   one-third of reported costs for the proposed US-Mexico border
   wall, and let your values guide you from there.)


   So how can we make large numbers more easily graspable? A group
   at Microsoft is working on it.

   Dan Goldstein, principal researcher, and Jake Hofman, senior
   researcher, have been running experiments to see what kinds of
   contextual clues—what they call “perspectives”—help people
   grasp the meaning of large quantities like distances, dollar
   amounts, population sizes, and more. In a 2016 [70]study,
   Goldstein and Hofman, along with Pablo Barrio, a computer
   scientist at Columbia University, crowdsourced suggestions for
   perspectives related to quotes taken from the New York Times,
   and then had participants rank their helpfulness. For a Times
   excerpt relating to firearms that stated, “Americans own almost
   300 million firearms,” the top-rated suggestion was: “To put
   this into perspective, 300 million firearms is about 1 firearm
   for every person in the United States.”


     1 million seconds is nearly 12 days, whereas 1 billion
     seconds is almost 32 years.

   “We found that perspectives were pretty helpful in helping
   people recall unfamiliar numbers that they had read, in
   estimating numbers that they hadn’t seen before, and also in
   detecting errors in potentially manipulated numbers,” Hofman
   said. A second study, not yet published, suggests that
   perspectives can have positive effects on the comprehension of
   numbers even six weeks after initial exposure, the researchers
   said.

   When scientists navigate their way through extreme numbers in
   their daily work, they aren’t constantly comparing enormous or
   miniscule measurements to units of everyday life. Instead,
   their fields have their own perspectives relative to different
   units. Priyamvada Natarajan, professor of astronomy and physics
   at Yale University, for example, said she operates in a totally
   different frame of reference when thinking about large
   distances and masses. A non-specialist might calculate that a
   black hole with a mass 1 million times that of the sun would be
   on the inconceivable order of 10^36 kilograms. But for
   Natarajan, who routinely deals with these objects, a 1-million
   solar mass black hole is a unit unto itself. In fact, “I
   probably have a better sense of what a solar mass (10^33 grams)
   is than say an ounce!” she wrote in an email. “It’s really a
   question of getting comfortable with these large numbers by
   really thinking of them relative to each other, not relative to
   units that we are more familiar with,” she wrote. Jeff Karp,
   associate professor of medicine at Brigham and Women’s Hospital
   in Cambridge, Massachusetts, does research at the
   nanoscale—billionths of meters, smaller than the width of a
   human hair. It’s a bit like being immersed in a new language,
   he said. “The more you submerse yourself into thinking about
   things at the extreme size scale, and start doing these
   comparisons, and start talking to others, and start reading—the
   more comfortable you become,” he said.

   Some insights that Goldstein and Hofman have gleaned from their
   research have made their way into Microsoft’s Bing search
   engine. For example, if you type in “area of” and then the name
   of a country, you are likely to get a number in square miles
   with a comparison to a US state underneath. Texas and
   California are two of the states that research participants had
   a good feel for in terms of area, Hofman and Goldstein said. So
   it should be instructive to read on Bing that Afghanistan is
   about the size of Texas and that Zimbabwe is about the size of
   California. Some perspectives may need more work. Bing says
   Argentina is “about 10 times the size of Nevada,” a state with
   an area that may be less familiar than California’s. “At a low
   level, almost any illustrative example helps,” Goldstein said.
   “You can get very precise if you want to really come up with
   accurate ones that are friendly on the mind.”

   Cornell University mathematician Steven Strogatz, for instance,
   asked people if they had a way to intuitively grasp the size
   difference between 1 million and 1 billion—and they didn’t. He
   didn’t find that surprising. In his New York Times [71]article
   “Visualizing Vastness,” he writes, “Things that are so far
   removed from our daily experience—like quarks, and dinosaurs,
   and Kim Kardashian—are inherently hard to understand,” extreme
   numbers included. But when he linked these numbers to time, it
   brought things in perspective: 1 million seconds is nearly 12
   days, whereas 1 billion seconds is almost 32 years. “Everybody
   gets it when you say it like that,” he wrote in an email. “If
   you just said 1 billion is three orders of magnitude greater
   than 1 million, I don’t think it would make the same
   impression.”


   We live among vast orders of magnitude, but they don’t have to
   be offputting. Rosling left an audience, in the 2013
   [72]documentary Don’t Panic, with this message: “Look at the
   data. Look at the facts about the world, and you will see where
   we are today, and how we can move forward with all these
   billions on our wonderful planet.”


   Elizabeth Landau is a science writer and communications
   specialist living in Pasadena, California. She holds an MA in
   journalism from Columbia University and a BA in anthropology
   from Princeton University. Follow her on
   Twitter [73]@lizlandau.
   Get the Nautilus newsletter


   The newest and most popular articles delivered right to your
   inbox!
   ____________________
   ____________________
   Subscribe

   ____________________

   WATCH: The theoretical physicist Max Tegmark is suspicious of
   infinity.

   [460406482_640.jpg]
   How to Understand Extreme Numbers


