[11]Q&A


A Life Inspired by an Unexpected Genius

By[12]John Pavlus


   May 19, 2016
   The mathematician Ken Ono believes that the story of Srinivasa
   Ramanujan — mathematical savant and two-time college dropout —
   holds valuable lessons for how we find and reward hidden
   genius.
   (BUTTON)

   For the first 27 years of his life, the mathematician [13]Ken
   Ono was a screw-up, a disappointment and a failure. At least,
   that’s how he saw himself. The youngest son of first-generation
   Japanese immigrants to the United States, Ono grew up under
   relentless pressure to achieve academically. His parents set an
   unusually high bar. Ono’s father, an eminent mathematician who
   accepted an invitation from J. Robert Oppenheimer to join the
   Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, N.J., expected his
   son to follow in his footsteps. Ono’s mother, meanwhile, was a
   quintessential “tiger parent,” discouraging any interests
   unrelated to the steady accumulation of scholarly credentials.


   This intellectual crucible produced the desired results — Ono
   studied mathematics and launched a promising academic career —
   but at great emotional cost. As a teenager, Ono became so
   desperate to escape his parents’ expectations that he dropped
   out of high school. He later earned admission to the University
   of Chicago but had an apathetic attitude toward his studies,
   preferring to party with his fraternity brothers. He eventually
   discovered a genuine enthusiasm for mathematics, became a
   professor, and started a family, but fear of failure still
   weighed so heavily on Ono that he attempted suicide while
   attending an academic conference. Only after he joined the
   Institute for Advanced Study himself did Ono begin to make
   peace with his upbringing.

   Through it all, Ono found inspiration in the story of Srinivasa
   Ramanujan, a mathematical prodigy born into poverty in
   late-19th-century colonial India. Ramanujan received very
   little formal schooling, yet he still produced thousands of
   independent mathematical results, some of which — like the
   Ramanujan theta function, which has found applications in
   string theory — [14]are still intensely studied. But despite
   his genius, Ramanujan’s achievements didn’t come easily. He
   struggled to gain acceptance from Western mathematicians and
   dropped out of university twice before dying of illness at the
   age of 32.


   While Ono, now 48, doesn’t compare himself to Ramanujan in
   terms of ability, he has built his career in part from
   Ramanujan’s insights. In 2014, Ono and his collaborators
   [15]Michael Griffin and [16]Ole Warnaar published a
   breakthrough result in algebraic number theory that generalized
   one of Ramanujan’s own results. Ono’s work, which is based on a
   pair of equations called the Rogers-Ramanujan identities, can
   be used to easily produce algebraic numbers (such as phi,
   better known as the “golden ratio”).


   More recently, Ono served as an associate producer and
   mathematical consultant for The Man Who Knew Infinity, a
   recently released feature film about Ramanujan’s life. And his
   new memoir, [17]My Search for Ramanujan: How I Learned to Count
   (co-authored with Amir D. Aczel), draws connections between
   Ramanujan’s life and Ono’s own circuitous path to mathematical
   and emotional fulfillment. “I wrote this book to show off my
   weaknesses, to show off my struggles,” Ono said. “People who
   are successful in their careers were not always successful from
   day one.”


   Like Ramanujan, who benefited from years of mentorship by the
   British mathematician G.H. Hardy, Ono credits his own success
   to serendipitous encounters with teachers who helped his
   talents flourish. He now spends a great deal of time mentoring
   his own students at Emory University. Ono has also helped
   launch the [18]Spirit of Ramanujan Math Talent Initiative, a
   venture that “strives to find undiscovered mathematicians
   around the world and match them with advancement opportunities
   in the field.”


   Quanta Magazine spoke with Ono about finding his way as a
   mathematician and a mentor, and about Ramanujan’s inspiring
   brand of creativity. An edited and condensed version of the
   interview follows.


