By [35]Jennifer Wilson


     January 19, 2016


   [36]Wilson-Tolstoy-College CreditILLUSTRATION BY MATT PANUSKA


   There was a rumor, among professors who came on board later,
   that the founders of Tolstoy College originally wanted to name
   their school after Leon Czolgosz, the Polish-American anarchist
   who assassinated President William McKinley. Tolstoy, being a
   pacifist, gave them better cover with the administration of the
   State University of New York at Buffalo, under which the school
   operated, or so the story goes. Charles “Chip” Planck, the
   founder of Tolstoy College, denies this. “We weren’t anarchists
   of the bomb-throwing variety,” he told me. Tolstoy College was
   an educational community based on the anarchist principles
   espoused, late in his life, by the author of “War and Peace”
   and “Anna Karenina.” It ran from 1969 to 1985, and was part of
   a project by the president of the university at the time,
   Martin Meyerson,to transform the Buffalo campus into the
   “Berkeley of the East,” a quest for prestige and higher
   enrollments that required something of an image change for a
   university in a freezing steel town suffering the effects of a
   long economic decline. As part of this rebranding, Meyerson
   adopted a more inclusive approach to the increasing political
   activism of the student body, calling for the establishment of
   a series of leftist educational communities, to be known as
   “the colleges.” In addition to Tolstoy College, there was Rosa
   Luxemburg College, which focussed on labor issues; a women’s
   studies college, led by Elizabeth Kennedy, a pioneer of lesbian
   history; a black studies college; and several others.

   Meyerson had Oxford and Cambridge in mind, as well as Berkeley,
   but the “colleges” were decidedly rougher around the edges than
   their British antecedents. Tolstoy College was housed in
   trailers, and a typical classroom consisted of a couch and a
   few chairs. There were no residential dorms assigned to the
   college, but the anarchist tradition of collective living was
   encouraged by workshops and courses on the subject—including
   “Anarchism and Everyday Life,” “Community Control of
   Utilities,” and “The Problems of Collective Living.” (Among the
   problems covered, according to the syllabus, were “sexual
   relationships between those living together” and “practical
   problems such as shit-work and unconscious power structures.”)
   Most years, there were a dozen or so faculty members; each
   semester, they offered between ten and fifteen seminars, with
   titles like “Intro to History from the Bottom Up” and “Making a
   New Society.” By 1975, nearly two hundred students were
   regularly enrolled in Tolstoy College courses. Those who
   attended did not have majors, per se—the structure was
   deliberately loose. In the founding documents, Planck described
   the colleges as being “in tension with the university,” and
   noted that, for this reason, they “do not aim at the precise
   definition and finality of a ‘department.’ “

   Planck chose Tolstoy’s name for his anarchist college in part
   because of the Russian author’s strong antiwar stance, best
   captured in “Letter to a Non-Commissioned Officer,” from 1899,
   in which Tolstoy urges young Russian soldiers to drop their
   arms and defect. (The college was not the first community based
   on the writer’s ideas: after Tolstoy renounced private property
   and dedicated himself to anarchism, his most dedicated
   followers developed [37]colonies devoted to living a Tolstoyan
   life, some of them as far flung as Japan, South Africa, and
   Chile.) Tolstoy himself served in the Crimean War, and became
   convinced that war was an exercise in which the ruling classes
   pitted “brother against brother.” His writings on pacifism
   influenced Gandhi and, through him, Martin Luther King; as the
   Vietnam War raged, his views gained new purchase. Planck was
   also inspired, he told me, by a volume of Tolstoy’s essays on
   education published by the University of Chicago Press in 1967.
   The essays espoused a radical pedagogy that put the teacher and
   student on equal footing. (Tolstoy implemented these ideas at
   his school for peasants on his estate outside Moscow, Yasnaya
   Polyana.)


   Planck taught a course called “Political Lives: Leo Tolstoy,”
   which exposed students to both the Russian’s literary works and
   his essays on nonviolent resistance. The “Political Lives”
   course rotated subjects of study, devoting entire semesters not
   only to Tolstoy but later to Angela Davis and even a taxi
   driver named Stephen R. Chamberlain, whose autobiography,
   “Crispus Attucks, I Steal a Cab, and Other Stories,” chronicled
   his experiences driving for the Madison Taxi Company in
   Buffalo. I asked Planck and others associated with Tolstoy
   College if they found it contradictory at all to establish an
   anarchist college that was funded by the state. Peter Murphy,
   who taught courses on radical history, said that such a
   question misunderstands what the true goals of anarchism were
   for them. “Back then, I never believed it was a contradiction,”
   he told me. “I believed that [anarchists] seize the apparatus
   of the state and use that apparatus against the state. If the
   state wants to fund its demise, that’s great.”

   Tolstoy College became the primary locus on campus for
   opposition to Vietnam: together, faculty and students organized
   petition drives, antiwar rallies, and more far-out events, such
   as “The Om Circle—A Guided Meditation for World Peace.”
   Students protested the university’s own relationship with the
   war, particularly the Department of Defense contracts that some
   science and engineering professors were using to fund their
   research.

   In keeping with its anarchist principles, the college tried to
   model equal and shared governance and collective
   decision-making in the running of the school as well.
   Initially, there was no official policy on grading, but the
   administration stepped in and imposed limits on the number of
   A’s that could be given out in a class. Professors then let
   students decide collectively who would get which grades, using
   the Marxist rubric of “each according to his ability, each
   according to his need.” In practice, this meant that one
   student might say, “I need the A; I’m going to law school,” in
   the hope of convincing other students that he was truly needy.
   Faculty salaries were collectively determined, too, and based
   on the respective household expenses of each staff member.

   Shortly after founding Tolstoy College, Planck left academia to
   start a farm in rural Virginia, inspired by the “back to the
   land” movement then gaining momentum. After his departure,
   Charles Haynie, a mathematics graduate student from Cornell who
   had become a civil-rights activist, became the de-facto head of
   Tolstoy College (although, as anarchists, faculty and students
   refrained from using official leadership titles). Before coming
   to Tolstoy College, Haynie, who died in 2001, worked with a
   nonprofit that tried to improve the mathematics curricula of
   black colleges in the South. When he wasn’t designing calculus
   lesson plans, Haynie was organizing with Freedom Riders and
   staging sit-ins, experiences that prompted Planck to hire him.
   His activism continued at Tolstoy College; at one protest, he
   brought his four-year-old daughter, Deirdre, along. Roena
   Haynie, Charles’s first wife, recalls her young daughter
   getting tear-gassed that day.

   Within a few years of its founding, the direction of Tolstoy
   College shifted: alongside its anarchist curriculum, it began
   to place a strong emphasis on the gay experience in America,
   and became known on campus as the “men’s-studies college.”
   Several new courses were introduced, among them “Homophobia,”
   “The Working-Class Macho Male,” and “Gay Literature.” (The last
   of these was the first course on gay literature ever taught at
   the university.) Tolstoy College instructors set up support
   groups for gay men that were open to the public, and one of the
   instructors, Alex van Oss, co-hosted “Stonewall Nation,” a
   radio show devoted to gay issues throughout the country, with a
   special focus on Buffalo. (It was broadcast on WBFO, the same
   station that gave Terry Gross her start.) Van Oss, who
   eventually went to work for NPR, even snagged an interview with
   Allen Ginsberg, in which the poet discussed coming out to his
   parents.

   The gay-studies curriculum at Tolstoy College partly grew out
   of an interest in how militarism was underpinned by cultural
   notions of masculinity. Most of the courses sought to subvert
   the gender expectations foisted on American men, which faculty
   believed steered young men toward the armed forces. (This idea
   can, arguably, be detected in “War and Peace,” in which
   Pierre’s pacifism is referred to by the elder Prince Bolkonsky
   as “women’s nonsense.”) One continues to find in Tolstoy
   College materials of this period, from course syllabi to
   student publications, echoes of the college’s antiwar
   origins—although pacifism is now articulated through a critique
   of traditional ideas about masculinity, as well as compulsory
   military service. The course description for “The Working-Class
   Macho Male” reads, “A lot of us end up, like me, in the Army or
   Marines—that’s the obvious place for our kind in this world.
   That’s what we’ve been set up for all along. The Fighting
   Marine!” One of the student journals sponsored by Tolstoy
   College includes a poem titled “I Am Not a Man,” which
   concludes, “I’m not a man. I meditate on peace and love. I’m
   not a man. I don’t want to destroy you.” Underneath the poem,
   there is a picture of Marx and Engels holding hands.

   In the nineteen-eighties, Tolstoy College finally lost its
   battle with the administration—which had spent nearly a decade
   attempting to defund the program—and was forced to close its
   doors amid budget cuts. Charles Haynie was able to hang on as a
   faculty member, teaching statistics in his final years at
   Buffalo. With Reagan in the White House and conservatism
   ascendant, the leftist colleges came to seem like a relic from
   the late sixties. (One professor, Paul Richmond, blamed the
   attitude of the era, an ethos he summarized as “We’re all O.K.
   and we all have money for cocaine and dancing and we’re all
   going off to the disco.”) It looks different, perhaps, now. I
   spoke with the former professors of Tolstoy College just before
   student protests at the University of Missouri and Yale made
   national news. The course material I read, and the student
   writings I found, didn’t seem terribly out of place in the
   current context. Consider, for instance, the letter written by
   a Tolstoy College student to SUNY Buffalo’s chartering
   committee, in 1974, when a budget shortfall threatened closure
   for the college. The letter offered the student’s “personal
   reasons for being in Tolstoy College.”

     I am a poor, lesbian/feminist, vague socialist, professional
     waitress, and over-age student from the rural/poor
     socio-economic stratum of America. I am also a person who
     cares about my dignity and your dignity and therefore I am
     committed to the eradication of my oppression and your
     oppression. That commitment means I feel alienated a whole
     lot of the time in this city and in this school. Often it
     means that people see lesbian not me, or that men see woman
     not me, or that middle class students see waitress, not me.
     It means that outside my circle of friends Tolstoy College
     is where I feel most total.

     When a charter member asked at the public hearing if
     [Tolstoy] college had any specific plan for the future or in
     the community, I whispered “Revolution.” I wish I had
     shouted it.

   The letter was signed, “In the Sincerity of the Revolution.”

   Jennifer Wilson is a postdoctoral fellow at the University of
   Pennsylvania.


      More:




