How Variable Fonts Can Help

   So how will variable fonts help fix this problem? Basically, by
   giving type designers their own version of responsive design: a
   single font file that can dynamically morph between different
   weights and sizes as its designer intended while remaining
   consistent across platforms.
   "“They’ll lead to faster, better websites; smaller app sizes;
   more flexible typography; and richer typographical palettes.” "

   “A variable font is a single font that works like multiple
   fonts,” explains Tim Brown, head of typography for Adobe Type,
   who helped solidify the variable font standard. “They’ll lead
   to faster, better websites; smaller app sizes; more flexible
   typography; and richer typographical palettes.”
   advertisement

   Existing OpenType fonts are what are called outline fonts.
   Inside the file, each letterform is defined as a mathematical
   series of lines and curves, which your computer draws on screen
   in real time. Compare this to bitmap fonts, which are
   essentially graphic files limited in resolution; outline fonts
   have the advantage that they can be infinitely scaled without
   resulting in pixelation. They’re a collection of instructions,
   not a collection of letters.
   [Photo: courtesy [40]Erik van Blokland]


   Variable fonts add weights and other design tweaks to OpenType
   by adding a new set of instructions to the format, allowing a
   font’s baseline design to be tweaked across 64,000 different
   axes. In other words, a variable font can properly bold, say,
   the letter “B” not by smearing it, or by downloading a separate
   font file, but by sending the computer precise mathematical
   instructions on how to turn a “B” into a B. (“Widen the main
   stroke by 10%, increase the apertures by 5%, and thicken the
   shoulders by 7%.”)

   Nor is a variable font useful only for bolding. For example,
   the OpenType format previously allowed fonts to be scaled to
   any size. But a font that is readable at 12 points on a desktop
   might be much harder to read on your Apple Watch, or as small
   print on the bottom of a magazine page. This is why many
   typeface designers, [41]like Tobias Frere-Jones, create
   variations of their fonts specifically designed for smaller
   screens and print sizes. A variable font could contain such
   instructions, without being a separate file.


   Heck, variable fonts are so powerful, there’s technically no
   reason they can’t contain multiple typefaces. A single variable
   font could potentially morph between Zapfino, Futura, and
   Wingdings, without requiring three different font downloads.
   Brown tells me, though, that variable fonts are really designed
   to interpolate between different variations of a single design,
   and not be typeface transformers. “Having multiple typefaces in
   a single variable font is theoretically possible, but off the
   top of my head its benefits are unclear and the likelihood of
   its success is minimal,” he says. “Given how variable font axes
   are designed, and how a few implementation ideas are already
   taking hold, it would be extremely uncommon.”
   [Image: From John Hudson, [42]Introducing OpenType Variable
   Fonts]



