Most Popular

    1. [50]The Myth of the Kindly General Lee


    2. [52]What Trump Doesn't Understand About Gun Control in
       Great Britain


    3. [54]My Family’s Slave


    4. [56]The Panic President


    5. [58]What ISIS Really Wants









           mailto:?subject=What Causes These Mysterious Fairy Circles?&body=For decades, scientists have puzzled over bizarre circles in the Namibian landscape. Now, they’ve found more in Australia.

       Text Size


   In the desert of northwest Australia, about 10 miles east of
   the small mining town of Newman, lies a natural wonder. If you
   fly overhead, you’ll see vast carpets of green spinifex grass,
   pockmarked by barren red circles, as if some deity had
   repeatedly stubbed out a cosmic cigar on the parched landscape.

   These disks of bare soil are called “fairy circles,” and
   they’re not unique to Australia—they also exist 6,000 miles
   away in Namibia. There, the circles number in the millions, and
   extend over some 1,500 miles of desert. They comprise different
   grasses but their patterns are the same: low-lying vegetation
   freckled by circles of empty soil. They almost seem alive,
   growing and shrinking with a [67]lifespan of 30 to 60 years.


   Local people believe them to be the work (or footprints) of
   deities and spirits. Scientists have tried to come up with more
   grounded explanations since they first started writing about
   the circles in the 1920s. Some suggested that they’re the work
   of grazing ants, or radioactive gases leaking from underground,
   or [68]poisonous plants that kill off their competitors.


   Over the last century, two main hypotheses for the cause of
   these circles have fought their way to the top of the scrum.
   The first is from [69]Norbert Juergens of the University of
   Hamburg, who says that the circles are [70]the work of sand
   termites. To store water, he argues, these insects eat the
   roots of grasses within a circular patch, allowing the
   underlying grains of sand to catch and absorb the falling rain.
   The result is Namibia’s version of a beaver dam—an engineered
   reservoir. And according to Juergens, the fierce competition
   between neighboring termite colonies causes the regular spacing
   of the circles.


   Many other researchers, including entomologists and botanists,
   aren’t convinced. They think the circles occur because plants
   engage in a tug-of-war for water and other scarce nutrients.
   Due to their battles, the landscape “self-organizes” into rings
   of deep-rooted grasses, draining water from a central reservoir
   where no other plants can thrive. This explains why, [71]as the
   researchers Michael Cramer and Nichole Barger found in 2013,
   the fairy circles are restricted to places with low rainfall,
   and why they grow after dry years and shrink after wet ones.
   Namibian fairy circles (Stephan Getzin)


   [72]Stephan Getzin from the University of Goettingen started
   off as a fan of the termite hypothesis when he began studying
   the fairy circles in 1999. But he defected to the
   self-organization camp after studying aerial images of the
   fairy circles, and seeing just how regular they are. “They have
   an extremely regular hexagonal spacing, like a honeycomb,” he
   says. “That pattern persists throughout the landscape for
   hundreds of thousands of meters. Termites and ants are not
   known to cause such strictly ordered patterns.” In May 2014, he
   published a paper [73]outlining his evidence for the
   self-organization hypothesis.


   Three days later, he got an email from Bronwyn Bell, an
   environmental manager at an iron-ore mine in Newman. We have
   something similar here, she said. To prove her point, she
   attached an aerial photo. “When I saw it, it looked really
   convincing,” says Getzin. Seven months later, he was on a plane
   bound for Newman.

   Getzin and his colleagues found that the Australian circles
   [74]exist in the same orderly honeycomb as their Namibian
   counterparts, with almost exactly the same spatial traits. And
   by measuring temperature and analyzing soil samples, they
   worked out how the circles might form.


   The critical point is that the area around Newman doesn’t get
   enough rain to sustain an even carpet of plants, so there’s
   competition for water. Plants that grow a little bit bigger
   than their neighbors draw in more water: Their deeper roots
   loosen the soil around them, allowing more water to seep in.
   Nearby plants benefit, while those further away die of drought.
   They leave patches of bare earth that are too hard, compact,
   and hot for seeds to germinate. These empty circles act as rain
   collectors: any water that falls on them runs off to the side,
   where it nourishes the encircling plants.

   When Getzin [75]simulated all of this on a computer, he
   produced virtual patterns that are almost indistinguishable
   from the actual fairy circles.


   He thinks that the Namibian circles form in a slightly
   different way. There, the fight for water mostly occurs
   underground; in Australia, it happens on the surface. But the
   basic idea is the same: Water conflicts that play out over
   meters create patterns that pockmark the land for kilometers.
   “The new paper moves us closer toward a unifying theory of
   fairy-circle formation,” says [76]Barger.


   It also weakens the termite hypothesis. Getzin found that most
   Australian fairy circles show no signs of these insects. He
   also mapped the locations of termite nests in one particular
   site and found that they’re randomly distributed, clustered in
   some areas and absent from others. That’s very different to the
   even hexagonal spacing of the fairy circles themselves.

   There’s something compelling about the termite hypothesis,
   which involves creatures actively shaping their world. It plays
   to our appreciation of agency, and perhaps our love for
   underdogs (or under-insects, as it were). By contrast, the
   self-organization concept is less intuitive. It’s much harder
   to imagine how thirsty plants, just by sitting there, could
   produce these beautiful, kilometer-wide patterns. Indeed,
   Juergens once described the idea to me as “just a synonym for
   fairies.”

   And yet, the natural world is full of examples of beautiful
   patterns that have deceptively simple origins.

   In 1952, Alan Turing, the English mathematician and
   code-breaker, suggested that the stripes and spots of many
   animals are produced by two molecules: an activator that
   produces the pattern, and an inhibitor that blocks it. These
   diffuse through the skin and interact with each other.
   Depending on how strongly they interact and how fast they
   spread, Turing predicted that they’d result in everything from
   [77]zebra-like stripes to [78]cheetah-esque spots. ([79]Try it
   out for yourself.)


   Many studies have since found many examples of these
   “[80]Turing patterns.” They’re evident in the pigments of
   [81]animal skins and seashells, and even the cells of [82]your
   fingers—examples of local interactions between spreading
   entities that create complicated, repeating patterns over vast
   scales. Scientists have seen such patterns in the distributions
   of [83]parasites and hosts, and the location of [84]plants in
   deserts. Getzin sees them in the fairy circles.


   “Fairy circles have certainly jumped from an obscure phenomenon
   known to only a few, to a celebrated but mysterious landform,”
   says [85]Walter Tschinkel, an entomologist from Florida State
   University. But “correlation between a computed model and
   nature is still not proof of causation, no matter how nicely
   the output mimics nature.”


   It will take an experiment to truly solve the fairy-circle
   mystery. Scientists will need to show that they can
   artificially create or close up the circles by manipulating
   water levels, soil quality, or termite numbers. That’s a tall
   order for a phenomenon that exists across miles and decades.

   Absent such experiments, it would certainly help to find more
   fairy circles. Barger thinks the odds are good. “With the
   increasing availability of satellite images globally it’s
   likely that we will continue to discover more instances of
   these circular gap patterns in arid environments in the
   future.”





