Why Do We Count?

   By [15]Craig Fehrman


   Filed under [16]Books





   The abacus is a tool, just like the calculator is a tool. Your
   smartphone’s calculator app — that’s a tool, too.

   But are numbers themselves a tool? That’s the case Caleb
   Everett makes in his new book, “[20]Numbers and the Making of
   Us: Counting and the Course of Human Cultures.” Everett, a
   professor of anthropology at the University of Miami, shows
   that numbers — or the words and symbols we use to represent
   specific quantities — emerged through a series of slow
   historical steps. Numbers may feel instinctual. They may seem
   simple and precise. But Everett synthesizes the latest research
   from archaeology, anthropology, psychology and linguistics to
   argue that our counting systems are not just vital to human
   culture but also were invented by that culture. “Numbers are
   not concepts that come to people naturally and natively,” he
   writes. “Numbers are a creation of the human mind.”


   I spoke to Everett by phone about the book.

   Craig Fehrman: Are human beings hardwired to think numerically?

   Caleb Everett: We seem to have some kind of innate
   predisposition to numbers, but it’s smaller than you’d think.
   At an early age, we have the ability to tell the difference
   between bigger groups — between, say, eight things and 16
   things. We can also tell one thing from two things or two
   things from three things. But other primates like chimps can do
   that. And once you get to four things, it starts to get tricky.

   CF: That’s where numbers come in, right? In your book, you
   suggest that our five-fingered hands — and the fact that we
   walk on our legs and keep those hands free — may have played a
   big role here.

   CE: My suspicion is that there were many, many times in history
   when people realized in an ephemeral way that this quantity is
   the same as that quantity — that this five, in terms of their
   fingers, is the same as that five, in terms of goats or sheep.
   It’s no coincidence that many unrelated languages have a
   numerical structure built around 10 or that the word for five
   is often the same as the word for hand. Once someone else heard
   you referring to something as a “hand” of things, it became a
   cognitive tool that could be passed around and preserved within
   a particular culture.

   CF: Once a particular culture has numbers, what does that
   allow?

   CE: The way our cultures look, and the kinds of technology we
   have, would be radically different without numbers. Large
   nation-states aren’t really possible without numbers. Large
   agricultural societies aren’t possible, either.

   Let’s say that two agricultural states in Mesopotamia, more
   than 5,000 and maybe as many as 8,000 years ago, wanted to
   trade with each other. To trade precisely, and we can see this
   in the archaeological record, they needed to quantify. So they
   cooked up these small clay tokens, with each token representing
   a certain quantity of a certain commodity like grain or beer.
   The tokens were then cooked inside a clay vessel that could be
   transported and cracked open. It was essentially a contract —
   you owe me this many whatever.

   At some point someone realized that in addition to putting the
   tokens in the vessel, they could make marks on the outside of
   the vessel for how many tokens were inside. And then someone
   realized the iconographical marks were enough to convey the
   meaning. Something like writing wasn’t invented in one fell
   swoop. But it’s not a stretch to say that the letters we write
   with in books and on websites owe a lot to that Mesopotamian
   system.

   CF: In your book, you also write about your extensive fieldwork
   with anumeric peoples, or hunter-gatherer cultures that do not
   possess their own words or symbols for counting.

   CE: There are about 7,000 languages in the world today, and the
   vast majority have numbers systems. But dozens have systems
   with only a handful of numbers. And a few languages and other
   communications systems, like the Pirahã’s in Brazil, have only
   imprecise words like hói [one or a couple] and hoí [a few].
   Many experiments have shown that without numbers, the Pirahã
   struggle with basic quantitative tasks. They have a hard time
   matching one set of objects to another set of objects — lining
   up, say, eight spools of thread next to eight balloons. It gets
   even harder when they have to recall an exact quantity later.

   It’s important to stress that these people are totally normal
   and totally intelligent; if you took a Pirahã person and raised
   them in a Portuguese home, they would learn numbers just fine.
   But without recourse to a number system, they struggle with
   counting. It’s an example of how powerful these cognitive tools
   can be.

   CF: It’s also a hint at what humans were like before numbers,
   or what other cultures would be like without numbers today.

   CE: Right. We’re not so special as a species as we sometimes
   think. Concepts that seem so simple to us — like “what is a
   prime number?” or “what is pi?” — took humans thousands of
   years and haphazard processes to arrive at.

   You may think, “I’m a numbers person.” Well, no, you’re not.
   Playing soccer is not innate, even though some humans are
   better at soccer than others. Numbers are the same way. You’re
   not innately a mathematician. You benefit from the cultural
   innovations that came before you. You’re much more like the
   Pirahã than you realize.

   Craig Fehrman lives in Bloomington, Indiana. He’s finishing a
   book on presidents and their books for Simon & Schuster.

   Filed under

   [21]Books (24 posts)



