How algorithms rule the world

   Read more

   The more we have, the more we rely on algorithms and automated
   recommendation systems. Hence the unstoppable march of
   algorithmic recommendations, machine learning, artificial
   intelligence and big data into the cultural sphere.

   Yet this isn’t the end of the story. Search, for example, tells
   us what we want to know, but can’t help if we don’t already
   know what we want. Far from disappearing, human curation and
   sensibilities have a new value in the age of algorithms. Yes,
   the more we have the more we need automation. But we also
   increasingly want informed and idiosyncratic selections. Humans
   are back.

   This is why, despite having the world’s most powerful book
   recommendation engine, Amazon bought [130]Goodreads, a website
   based around personal book reviews. It is why sites such as
   Canopy.co thrive atop Amazon. Canopy knows many of Amazon’s
   best items are hidden in the mediocre morass. Canopy’s
   founders, all designers, trawl through thousands of entries a
   day to highlight exceptional products.


   It’s why publishers keep producing new imprints, to allow for
   more diverse and personal lists, and why bookshops are once
   again flourishing, even though we can find any book we want
   online. We go to browse their tables. In Japan they talk about
   tsundoku, or the uneasy feeling of having too many books to
   read. They also have its solution: a [131]bookshop in Tokyo’s
   Ginza that sells only one book at a time.


   This rejuvenated interest in curation isn’t just happening in
   publishing. On Spotify you can listen to 30m songs, 20% of
   which have never been streamed once. To help manage this huge
   catalogue, Spotify spent a reported $100m (£77m) acquiring a
   company called [132]the Echo Nest, which pioneered a technique
   known as audio-fingerprinting, which automatically categorises
   songs. At the same time, however, [133]Spotify has massively
   expanded its range of playlist makers, musical experts who are
   rapidly becoming the new DJs.


   Spotify’s office in Stockholm, Sweden. The company has expanded
   its range of musical experts who curate playlists.

   [134]Facebook [135]Twitter [136]Pinterest


   Spotify’s office in Stockholm, Sweden. The company has expanded
   its range of musical experts who curate playlists. Photograph:
   Thomas Karlsson/DN/Scanpix

   [137]Netflix has more TV and film than we could ever want. An
   early pioneer of using data science to manage culture, it even
   launched a $1m competition for teams of researchers to improve
   its algorithms – and then, despite the prize money, didn’t
   implement any changes as they weren’t seen as good enough. Yet
   Netflix also trained viewers to tag its content exhaustively.
   They make judgments machines cannot: is the ending wistful? Are
   moustaches important in the film or not?


   Facebook is mired in a series of controversies about the
   curation of its news feed, from its broadcasting live killings,
   to editing out an iconic photo of the Vietnam war, to
   accusations of political bias. It recently tried to smooth the
   process out by firing its human editors … only to find the news
   feed degenerated into a mass of fake and controversial news
   stories.

   [138]Apple’s news and music apps make much of their human
   curation, even hiring famous names from newsrooms and radio.
   Twitter invested heavily in its [139]Moments product. While not
   universally liked, it shows Twitter wants to curate better.
   Samsung’s news app divides into what you want to know and need
   to know; the former chosen by algorithm, the latter by editors.
   Big tech is on a hiring spree for old-fashioned experts.


   We’ve also got excess stuff. The average western European
   household owns 10,000 items, more in the US. But in order to
   cope we turn not to an app but the [140]Kondo method, the
   wildly popular home organisation technique relying on our
   personal histories. In retail’s upper tier, a renewed emphasis
   on expert selection is behind the success of shops as diverse
   as fashion boutique [141]Opening Ceremony and “supermarket of
   the future” Eataly. As with our media, we’ve passed from an era
   of bulk industrial selection to finely honed choice.


   Curation can be a clumsy, sometimes maligned word, but with its
   Latin root curare (to take care of), it captures this
   irreplaceable human touch. We want to be surprised. We want
   expertise, distinctive aesthetic judgments, clear expenditure
   of time and effort. We relish the messy reality of another’s
   taste and a trusted personal connection. We don’t just want
   correlations – we want a why, a narrative, which machines can’t
   provide. Even if we define curation as selecting and arranging,
   this won’t be left solely to algorithms. Unlike so many sectors
   experiencing technological disruption, from self-driving cars
   to automated accountancy, the cultural sphere will always value
   human choice, the unique perspective.

   This is where the arts and humanities strike back in a world of
   machine learning. Here is a new generation of jobs. Information
   overload and its technology-driven response are one of the
   great transformations of our time. But amid today’s saturation
   (and those teetering piles of new books), knowledge and
   subjective judgment are more valuable than ever. In the words
   of one Silicon Valley investor, “software eats the world”.
   Well, software can’t eat human curation. Contrary to myth,
   traditional gatekeeping roles are here to stay.

   What we will see are hybrids: rich blends of human and machine
   curation that handle huge datasets while going far beyond
   narrow confines. We now have so much – whether it’s books,
   songs, films or artworks (let alone data) – that we can’t
   manage it all alone. We need an “algorithmic culture”. Yet we
   also need something more than ever: human taste.

   • Michael Bhaskar is author of Curation: The Power of Selection
   in a World of Excess (Piatkus, £20). To order a copy for
   £16.40, go to [142]bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333
   6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders
   min p&p of £1.99.


   Topics






















