See, Accept, Affirm

   Posted on [18]December 23, 2016 by [19]DJ Bruce


   The mathematical community is one, which—while not as diverse
   as it could/should be—counts as members individuals from all
   backgrounds and of all identities. These individualities are
   something we as a community should cherish and support.

   One outlet for such support that I recently had the opportunity
   to help implement here at the UW–Madison (sorry for the
   humblebrag), is a statement of community commitment to, and
   value of, inclusivity. Based on this experience, I would like
   to talk about what such a statement is, why I think they are
   meaningful, and to (not so) secretly encourage others to do
   similar things within their own departments.

   To start, such a statement simply outlines what inclusivity and
   diversity mean to you/your department, how this group values
   these concepts, and how they will fight for and support them.
   For example, here at the UW–Madison, the department adopted the
   following statement,

     “As a diverse group, the Mathematics Department strives to
     foster an open and supportive community in which to conduct
     research, to teach, and to learn. In accordance with these
     beliefs and § 36.12 of the Wisconsin Statutes, the
     Mathematics Department affirms that all community members
     are to be treated with dignity and respect and that
     discrimination and harassment will not be tolerated. We
     further commit ourselves to making the department a
     supportive, inclusive, and safe environment for all
     students, faculty, staff, and visitors, regardless of race,
     religion, national origin, sexual orientation, gender
     identity, disability, age, parental status, or any other
     aspect of identity.

     To all members of our community, we, the members of the
     Department of Mathematics, welcome you.“

   Of course what precisely such a statement should say, and how
   it should say it varies person-to-person and group-to-group. I
   see power in these statements having unique, personal
   voices—serving as honest expressions of one’s beliefs and
   commitments, laid bare for the reader to hear. So if you are
   thinking about drafting such a statement, consider trying to
   make it personal. Be honest and speak to those who you hope
   eventually read it.

   As a second example of such a statement, and to highlight a
   slightly different voice, here is (in some sense) my own
   statement. (Note my statement was influenced by Federico
   Ardila-Mantilla’s amazing recent article in the Notices,
   “[20]Todos Cuentan: Cultivating Diversity in Combinatorics”.)


     No student may be denied admission to, participation in or
     the benefits of, or discriminated against in any service,
     program, course or facility of the {UW} system or its
     institutions or centers because of the student’s race,
     color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, disability,
     ancestry, age, sexual orientation, pregnancy, marital status
     or parental status.” ~ § 36.12, Wisconsin Statutes

     I recognize the importance of a diverse, inclusive, and
     supportive community. In accordance with these beliefs, as
     well as § 36.12 of the Wisconsin Statutes, I am committed
     fully to the following axioms:

     Axiom 1: All members of the department/university community
     should be treated with dignity and respect.

     Axiom 2: I strive to promote a supportive, inclusive, and
     safe environment for all students, faculty, and staff,
     regardless of race, religion, national origin, sexual
     orientation, gender identity, disability, age, parental
     status, or any other aspect of identity.

     Axiom 3: Incidences of hate, bias, discrimination, or
     violence have no place in a department/university community,
     and will not be tolerated.

     Axiom 4: I will, to the best of my abilities, aid those
     facing instances of bias, discrimination, hate, or violence;
     directly and by helping individuals find the appropriate
     campus and community resources.

     These axioms serve as guideposts in teaching, research,
     outreach, and all aspects of my career/life. Moreover I am
     dedicated to working/partnering with other campus
     organizations (Multicultural Student Center, University
     Health Service, LGBT Campus Center, End Violence on Campus,
     McBurney Center, Campus Women’s Center, etc.) to promote
     these axioms.

     Finally, to all members of our campus community, I would
     like to say:

     I see you, I accept you, and I affirm you.

   At this point, some of you reading this might be wondering what
   the point of these statements is. You, or well the conveniently
   constructed strawperson I so often use rhetorically at this
   point in my writing, may be thinking, “Surely people know that
   our math department is a nice friendly place, which is
   inclusive of all people.”

   Well, a couple of points:

   First, be careful in thinking your department and university
   are friendly places free from bias, hate, discrimination, and
   violence. The fact of the mater is that most are [21]not. (Some
   [22]privileges checklists!) So taking a moment to write this,
   and honestly evaluating your, and your department’s, commitment
   to inclusion and diversity can be eye opening. You may begin to
   see incidences of bias, hate, and violence you were previously
   blind to.


   Secondly, even if your department is a magical land free of
   bias and hatred—it’s not, but regardless—not everyone knows
   this. Sure you might, but I am certain that there is someone,
   another grad student, a visitor, and a calculus student, who
   doesn’t. Someone who is unsure of whether the department will
   respect their identity, or whether there is someone who they
   can turn to for support. Letting this person know that you
   recognize them and will do your best to support them is
   meaningful. There is power in being an ally and power in
   recognizing and affirming the identities and rights of others,
   especially those who often face bias, hate, discrimination, and
   violence. This can even more true in turbulent [23]times like
   [24]these where many people feel uncertain, unwelcome, and
   unsafe.


   All this is to say that creating a statement of commitment to
   inclusivity can be both meaningful and powerful. However, they
   are not ends in themselves. They will not end bias, hatred, and
   discrimination within your department, university, or the
   mathematical community more generally. So while I encourage
   everyone to the time to write such a statement, I also think it
   is important to recognize that such a statement is best seen as
   a starting point, a guidepost that can direct your actions
   going forward.
       Well how will you, or others, handle a situation where
       someone creates a hostile environment in the classroom?
       Moreover is there training to help instructors identify and
       handle incidences of bias and hate in their classrooms?
       people of all gender identities? Well are the health plans
       your department offers [25]inclusive of trans-persons? Do
       you have gender-neutral washrooms in your department? Do
       instructors ask students what [26]pronouns they use?

       harassment? Well do students know who they should report
       incidences of violence and harassment to within the
       department? Are your department’s policies on these matters
       clearly articulated and publicized? Do instructors know
       what campus resources exists to help victims of violence?

   I could go on—in fact, that might make an interesting future
   post—but to keep it short: creating a inclusive, supportive,
   and safe community takes dedicated, deliberate, and thoughtful
   action; writing a statement of commitment is just a first step.
   (I know that this is my goal here at UW–Madison.)

   Finally to all those reading this—especially those who may be
   spinning, either a bit or a lot—let me reiterate what I said
   above:

   I see you, I accept you, and I affirm you.


