September 14, 2016

[93]Student Stories


Are You Smarter Than a 12-Year-Old? Tween Prodigy Enrolls at Cornell

By [94]Rebecca Blair | September 14, 2016


   [95]Like[96]Tweet Email[97]Print [98]More




   Jeremy Shuler ’20 was 12 years old when he started classes at
   Cornell this fall, but he grew up seeing the campus during
   annual visits to his grandparents’ Ithaca house. A few years
   ago, he recounted, his parents took him to a stargazing night
   at the Fuertes Observatory on North Campus.

   “It was a cold night, and both the host and Jeremy were
   particularly interested in star distances at the time,”
   recalled Andy Shuler ’97, Jeremy’s father.

   Jeremy, who had just turned 10, started arguing with the host
   about a particular star. The two disagreed on the star’s exact
   distance from Earth and kept going back and forth on the number
   of light years.

   “Were you right?” I asked Jeremy.

   “Well, yeah,” he replied, laughing. “I was using more recent
   data.”


   Jeremy Shuler has had a lot of practice being right. He learned
   to read both Korean and English when he was 17 months old,
   mastered algebra at four, calculus at seven and then — when he
   had progressed past the point his mother could instruct him —
   started teaching himself more advanced math out of books. He
   has spent the last few years taking online high school classes
   while working on number theory, quantum mechanics and coding
   projects on the side.

   Jeremy Schuler's mother said she discovered her son was
   unusually advanced after he taught himself to read Korean at 17
   months.

   Cameron Pollack / Sun Photography Editor

   Jeremy Schuler’s mother said she knew her son was unusually
   advanced after he taught himself to read Korean at 17 months.

   Jeremy appears at first glance like a typical pre-teen, often
   offering short, shy answers to questions and twisting around in
   his chair as we talk. It wasn’t until the conversation turned
   to math and science that he began to speak with the authority
   one might expect from a 12-year-old genius. When he did,
   though, he easily eclipsed everyone in the room, including his
   parents — two aerospace engineers.

   He has always been miles ahead of his peers academically, but
   it was about three years ago when it became clear that Jeremy
   would earn his high school diploma before he turned 13. The
   Shulers were then left to figure out how to go about enrolling
   the youngest Ivy League student on record.

   Jeremy’s mother, Harrey Shuler, said she and Jeremy’s father
   had to use a paper form to register him for the SATs because he
   was too young to make an online College Board account. Jeremy
   was also too young to register for the Common App, so they sent
   individual applications to each college to which he applied.
   They even had to submit his Free Application for Federal
   Student Aid in hard-copy — they are looking forward to next
   year, when, as a 13-year-old, he can create an online account
   and save his parents some paperwork.

   Armed with a 2320 on the SATs, Jeremy applied to several
   schools and was accepted to Cornell and the University of Texas
   at Austin. Ithaca, close to a branch of his father’s company
   and already familiar to the family, seemed like the perfect
   place to relocate from their Texas home.

   “We’ll see how I feel during the winter, though,” Andy Shuler
   added.


   A slew of media articles published over the summer have raised
   Jeremy’s profile dramatically, to the point that he was a
   recognizable figure to many students by the time he started
   classes. However, he seemed unfazed by the attention, saying
   only that it has been “pretty interesting” and that he enjoys
   it.

   During the first two weeks of the semester, Jeremy’s mother
   walked with him to class to help him get his bearings. She said
   she was surprised at the number of students who wanted selfies
   with her son. “Some people just [come up and say] ‘You’re the
   famous boy, right?’ and take the selfie and walk away. I
   thought it was kind of rude,” she laughed. “But some people
   would introduce themselves and talk to him.”

   The Shulers say they submitted Jeremy’s college applications
   with paper forms because he was too young to register for the
   Common App.

   Cameron Pollack / Sun Photography Editor

   The Shulers say they submitted Jeremy’s college applications
   with paper forms because he was too young to register for the
   Common App.

   Jeremy admitted that he has more homework than he expected, but
   he said he finds the material manageable (although he added
   that, since he finished BC Calculus three years ago, he has had
   to refresh himself on some of the content). He has fallen into
   a steady routine: he wakes up in his family’s downtown
   apartment, takes a bus to campus, alternates between
   Okenshields and Risley for lunch and can now confidently
   navigate campus on his own.

   Even with his quasi-celebrity status, Jeremy Schuler seems to
   have adapted to college life at least as well as the typical
   12-year-old adapts to middle school. While he spends nights and
   weekends at home or traveling around the Finger Lakes region
   with his parents, he has made a couple of good friends in his
   classes and enjoys talking to friendly students around campus.
   Having spent a few summers at math circles and math camps, he
   said he is used to being the youngest in the room.


   Harrey Shuler said her first hint that her son was unusually
   advanced came when he was 17 months old.

   “I was writing an email to my friend, and I was using Hangul,
   which is the Korean alphabet, and Jeremy was curious about
   that,” she said. “So I wrote down all the consonants and
   vowels, and then I made the sound.”

   The next day, she found Jeremy confidently reading Hangul. Once
   he realized English syllables worked the same way as Korean
   ones, he almost immediately taught himself to read English,
   too. He was able to read full books on his own by the time he
   turned two.

   From that point on, Andy Shuler said he and his wife had to
   constantly scramble to keep Jeremy challenged. “We couldn’t get
   him books fast enough,” he said. They decided homeschool would
   be the best way to ensure their son had access to a curriculum
   tailored to his unusual learning pace, so Harrey quit her job
   as an aerospace engineer and started teaching Jeremy full time.

   For a few years, Jeremy fixated on astronomy. Then, when he was
   five, he read Journey Through Genius: The Great Theorems of
   Mathematics by William Dunham and entered a math phase that has
   yet to end.

   His mother thinks he picks up mathematical concepts so quickly
   because he has an innate understanding of equations. “He’s into
   symmetry,” she explained. “When there’s a function, there
   should be an inverse function.” While most of us have to follow
   a set series of steps to solve a math problem, Jeremy can
   intuit it; he doesn’t just solve it — he understands the
   equation as a whole.

   After graduation, Jeremy plans to pursue an advanced degree,
   and he predicts he will eventually land in academia. He said
   his ultimate goal is to unify quantum mechanics and number
   theory.

   Jeremy Shuler said his professors treat him no differently than
   they treat other students.

   Cameron Pollack / Sun Photography Editor

   Jeremy Shuler said his professors treat him no differently than
   they treat other students.

   “Once he sets his mind, it’s really hard to persuade him not to
   do something,” Harrey Shuler said.


   In his first semester, Jeremy is taking 17 credits spread
   across physics, engineering, math, computer science and
   linguistics. He said he misses being able to sleep in for
   homeschool but is otherwise completely comfortable in the
   classroom setting. His professors have treated him just like
   any other student, and both his engineering academic advisor
   and the University administration have gone through pains to
   ensure that he transitions smoothly.

   Going from homeschool to a first-year engineering student’s
   workload, Jeremy has less time for his hobbies than he used to.
   Still, he said he tries to finds time between classes to work
   on a couple of projects: a dungeon-themed video game and a
   random map generator.

   Confused by the latter term, I asked him to explain what a
   random map generator does.

   “It makes a random map,” he responded.

   Pressed for more, he explained that the program allows a user
   to input several parameters and then maps out one hemisphere of
   a fictional planet.

   “Oh, okay,” said his father, a systems engineer for Lockheed
   Martin, catching on. “So you input how much is sea, how much is
   land and how rocky it is, or something?”

   “Not quite,” Jeremy said, smiling but hurried, already eager to
   move on to talk of his game. “It’s more complicated than that.”


