U.S. Innovation at Risk: Science Funding Crunch Clashes with a
Burgeoning Ph.D. Workforce

   By [46]Lakshmi Chandrasekaran


   "A (continuing resolution) Attenuates Progress. That would be
   C-R-A-P in case you haven’t figured that out,” [47]said
   National Institutes of Health Director Francis Collins last
   month, talking about how government funding affects research.
   Collins, quoted in Science magazine, referred to an amorphous
   continuing federal funding program that ends this Friday.


   Congress [48]passed a CR in September to fund federal
   government agencies – including research-funding institutions
   such as the NIH and National Science Foundation (NSF) – through
   this week. This means the current levels of funding would
   continue until the ‘artificial deadline’ of December 9th.
   Beyond that, there is had been no [49]further funding plan in
   place. And hence Francis Collins’ colorful lament.


   In the [50]latest update, Congress has passed an extension to
   this stopgap-funding bill to last until April 28th of next
   year. This is akin to kicking the bucket down the road and
   having no long-term resolutions in place.


   It is not as if research funding agencies always get what they
   want. For the 2017 research budget, NIH has proposed a $825
   million (2.6 percent) [51]increase and NSF’s budget request
   proposes an increase of $500.53 million (6.7 percent) over
   levels sought for 2016. However, last year NSF proposed an
   [52]increase of nearly 380 million dollars (5.2 percent
   increase) over 2015 funding levels and Congress approved only
   1.6 percent increase of $119 million.
   Ph.D. graduates are increasingly choosing non-traditional
   career paths due to a dearth in academic positions. Image
   credit: Pixabay.


   Funding is even more uncertain now due to President-elect
   Donald Trump’s previous criticisms of NIH.  Trump, talking to
   conservative radio host Michael Savage last year, [53]said, “I
   hear so much about the NIH, and it’s terrible.” With such
   ambiguous statements from the leader of the next
   administration, the fate of science funding for the next four
   years remains the biggest mystery and a source of consternation
   among researchers.


   The [54]Bloomberg Innovation Index for 2015 gives the U.S. an
   overall ranking of sixth place in innovation out of the world’s
   50 most innovative countries. South Korea tops the list as a
   world leader in innovation according to the Bloomberg report.
   By steering well-trained bright minds away from academia, our
   country might experience a drain of human potential on
   innovation. We are at risk of [55]losing supremacy in areas
   such as research and development, manufacturing, patents,
   education etc.


   “We are thinking hard about ways to better understand the state
   of biomedical research in an era of hyper-competition, and ways
   in which we can support a larger number of outstanding
   scientists and foster the future biomedical research
   workforce,” [56]Megan Columbus, from the Office of Extramural
   Research at the NIH said.


   Columbus added that NIH is addressing the challenge of funding
   grant proposals by actively exploring how to manage the
   biomedical research portfolio to optimize impact and
   sustainability of the scientific enterprise and the research
   workforce.  NIH programs include support for early career
   researchers and the next generations of the biomedical
   workforce. Columbus highlighted their [57]BEST (NIH Broadening
   Experiences in Scientific Training) program, a [58]career
   transition award program for advanced postdoctoral research
   scientists.


   Postdocs have become vulnerable researchers facing insecure
   career paths as Ph.D. degrees outpace professorships and
   academic research.

   In the U.S. academic system, professors at research-heavy
   universities often receive promotions based on the amount of
   grant money they can secure from foundations, industrial
   partners and governmental agencies such as NSF or NIH. These
   academic positions are referred to as "tenure-track". In
   theory, this translates to a lifetime employment as a
   professor, an extremely alluring prospect for researchers with
   a Ph.D., who spend an average of 14 years after high school on
   advanced degrees and post-docs to be eligible to apply for a
   tenured job.

   Over the past decade, Ph.D.s awarded in science and engineering
   majors as reported by the [59]NSF Survey of Earned
   Doctorates is at the highest level ever recorded in the past 58
   years. The report indicates that as of 2014, STEM (science,
   technology, engineering and math) fields account for 75 percent
   of the doctorates awarded, compared to a 66 percent awarded in
   2004.


   But as the laws of economics dictate with any growing
   population, the demand for resources hits the ceiling as time
   progresses. And sure enough, [60]recent trends show a narrower
   pool of jobs for freshly minted Ph.D.s - with one tenure-track
   position opening up for every 18 Ph.D. graduates.


   Traditionally, most Ph.D.s expand on their expertise during a
   few years of postdoctoral training before landing a
   tenure-track academic position. However, the report indicates
   that in every discipline including non-STEM fields, the number
   of graduates with a committed academic employment hit an
   all-time low in 2014 compared to the past 15 years.

   A non-postdoc industry job pays a Ph.D. in a [61]median salary
   range of $40,000 to $105,000 as of 2014. This is much higher
   than pay packages for academic postdoc jobs with starting
   salaries of $40,000-$49,000. Despite the lack of monetary
   incentives, many tenacious Ph.D.s clamor for academic positions
   – making the already dwindling number of positions highly
   competitive.


   “It’s a very specific personality that wants to stay in
   academics: whether you want to put up with the funding
   situation, with being stretched in so many different ways,”
   said Alice Doughty, a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of
   Earth Sciences at Dartmouth University. Doughty is on a hunt
   for a tenure-track professorship position and feels that there
   are far more postdocs than there are faculty positions
   available. “For one job that I applied for in Boston, the email
   said something like ‘Sorry you didn’t make the shortlist- there
   were over 400 applications for this job.’ So that gave me a
   little bit of perspective,” she said. “But, I really enjoyed it
   so far and would like to continue it,” states a confident
   Doughty.

   So, what are the repercussions of Congress’ (in)action and how
   is it felt in the research community in America?

   The market data on the dearth of academic positions is
   influencing the careers choices of the current crop of would-be
   doctorates. “It has become easier for graduating STEM PhD’s to
   get a post-doc position. The real bottleneck comes when finding
   tenure or non-tenure track research positions at universities,”
   said Danielle Fanslow, a graduate student in life sciences at
   Northwestern University. Gina Daniel, another Ph.D. student in
   microbiology and immunology at Northwestern University,
   concurs. “In mine and my colleagues’ experience, it is easiest
   to get an academic post-doc position. But I’ve heard peers say
   they’ve gotten one offer after submitting 60 or 100
   applications for tenure-track positions.”

   The funding crunch and lack of academic positions has motivated
   students like Fanslow and Daniel to think about "alternate"
   career options even before graduating with a Ph.D. And here is
   where academic institutions and [62]senior professors can play
   a critical role in preparing students for both securing grants
   and alternate career choices, outside of academia.


   “We advise postdocs to be engaged in learning about all steps
   of the funding process from preparing an application to the
   review process to appropriate financial management of sponsored
   awards. Postdocs at Northwestern have been quite successful
   when applying for non-federally sponsored awards,” said
   Jennifer Hobbs, Director of the Office of Postdoctoral Affairs
   (OPA) at Northwestern University, citing a couple of postdoc
   examples, who have gone on to obtain faculty positions at
   University of Texas and Northwestern’s Feinberg School of
   Medicine as a result of obtaining non-federal grants.

   As examples of other initiatives run by the OPA, Hobbs said
   their office partners with Northwestern’s Kellogg School of
   Management to support the participation of a select number of
   post-docs in a week-long program that provides foundational
   knowledge and skills in core business disciplines, such as
   accounting, strategy, leadership, and management of
   intellectual property.

   Northwestern also participates in programs that enhance the
   diversity of the faculty. “We take part in the Professorial
   Advancement Initiative (PAI), funded by NSF Alliance for
   Graduate Education and the Professoriate Transformation grant,”
   said Hobbs. Through PAI, Northwestern works with 11
   institutional partners and the [63]Big Ten Academic Alliance to
   provide targeted professional development activities, a
   cross-institutional mentoring team, as well as opportunities to
   connect with postdoctoral fellows and faculty from other
   institutions participating in Big Ten Academic Alliance.


   Graduate students such as Fanslow are appreciative that
   Northwestern recognizes the need to train students for
   non-academic career paths. “I am able to participate in several
   career development activities at Northwestern such as writing
   for the [64]Helix Magazine and participating in the Chicago
   Graduate Student Association,” she said, adding that these
   activities gave her necessary communication and management
   skills that she cannot get in the lab.


   Liz Bajema is close to finishing her Ph.D. in chemistry at
   Northwestern, where she focused on using cobalt-based molecules
   to manufacture new drugs to cure cancer. But she’s thinking of
   exploring alternate career choices such as consulting or data
   analytics or a career in industry. “The job market on the whole
   for chemists isn’t terrible, but tenure-track academic
   positions are scarce.” Bajema felt that this has certainly
   influenced her career choice, “because I do not want to invest
   in an academic career that may or may not pan out, “ she said.

   With the academic scenario bleak for entry-level tenure-track
   position seekers, how do already-tenured scientists fare? Data
   from [65]NIH’s Office of Extramural Research shows an
   acceptance rate of a mere one in every six proposals submitted
   for funding in 2014.


   Federal research funding is not keeping pace with the number of
   graduating Ph.D.s in the United States. This has consequences
   in terms of new research and innovation and professor workload.
   All infographics created by Lakshmi Chandrasekaran/Medill based
   on data sources indicated on individual charts.
   John Holdren, a physicist by training and President Barack
   Obama’s science adviser and director of the White House Office
   of Science and Technology Policy [66]has acknowledged in an
   interview with Nature magazine that worthy proposals vastly
   exceed what the NIH and NSF are able to fund.


   Of the nearly 40,000 newcomer investigators applying for these
   grants in 2014, the NIH funding rate stood at a historically
   low level of 25.1 percent. Customarily, this bracket has always
   been accorded a special status, since these new professors need
   money setting up their research project.

   And for tenured professors – with well-established projects and
   a history of productivity, it is still a scramble to secure
   grant money. Meredith Kelly, an associate professor of Earth
   Science at Dartmouth College who works in climate change
   research, said that as a young assistant professor she found it
   easier to obtain grants from the NSF. “Now that I am tenured
   it’s really hard to get grants. I feel like the bar is higher
   and that’s the challenge that I am facing right now. I spend so
   many hours writing proposals. I should just write papers but
   then I can’t fund my graduate students!”

   Compared to the funding shortage in America, other
   industrialized countries are pushing for [67]professorships and
   expanded research. Earlier this year, the German federal
   government created 1000 professorships by signing an agreement
   worth $1.1 billion. “This is going in a good direction. Up to
   now, there was no such a plan,” said Martin Lotze, professor of
   neurology at the University of Greifswald, Germany. This is
   probably a good start although Lotze doesn’t think this
   initiative may help much since it obviously would not be able
   to employ all the 28,000 medical and Ph.D. students who
   graduate from German universities every year.


   Besides, a peculiar German science employment law restricts the
   creation of permanent professorship positions in universities
   and requires well-established professors to quit their
   positions after 12 years, pushing them back into the job
   market. “That’s why so many scientists from Germany go to the
   States, to Australia or to the UK,” said Lotze.

   Also, a [68]recent study cautions against the mere creation of
   more faculty slots. The authors contend that more professorship
   openings would not only increase the number of professors but
   as a consequence produce more future Ph.D. students that these
   professors graduate from their labs. Hence the problem of a
   doctorate surplus in the job market would persist.


   “There’s definitely a link between declining levels of federal
   funding and public views on the quality of science,”
   said Dietram Scheufele, John E. Ross Professor in Science
   Communication at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. “But it’s
   much more pernicious than simply assuming that voters make
   inferences about the value of science from the amounts of money
   the federal government spends on the scientific enterprise,” he
   clarified.

   So, does the lack of government funding necessarily translate
   to reduced scientific research? Not necessarily, said
   Scheufele, adding that since the 1960s, we have defunded
   science enough to have two-thirds of that research funded by
   industry.  This opens the door to commercial interests that
   determine what kind of research takes place, rather than create
   an unbridled atmosphere where true innovation occurs. This
   trend also provides the anti-vaccine movement and the anti-GMO
   lobby with all the ammunition they need to undermine scientific
   consensus.

   But ultimately, as a result of shrinking budgets affecting the
   number of academic jobs, what are the repercussions that our
   country is facing?

   “In the long run, shrinking federal budgets for science will
   create a crisis of confidence that will not just create public
   health crises, but also undermine our ability to compete in the
   global marketplace and in terms of national security with
   countries like China or Germany who are investing heavily in
   science and technology,” said Scheufele.

   This article is [69]republished from Medill News
   Service/Northwestern University.
   Lakshmi Chandrasekaran received her Ph.D. in mathematical
   sciences at the New Jersey Institute of Technology. She is
   currently pursuing her masters in journalism with a health &
   science writing concentration at Northwestern's Medill School
   of Journalism. She is a freelance science writer whose work has
   appeared in PLUS math magazine, HELIX - Science in Society
   magazine at Northwestern University, and The Munich Eye, an
   online newspaper based in Munich, Germany, among others.
   Please enable JavaScript to view the [70]comments powered by
   Disqus.[71]blog comments powered by Disqus
   About SIAM News Blogs


   The SIAM News Blog brings together updates on cutting edge
   research, events and happenings, as well as insights on broader
   issues of interest to the applied math and computational
   science community. Learn more or submit an article or idea.

   [72]Learn more
   Most Recent
   [73][Awards.png]
   [74]Happening Now
   [75]Red Sock Award Acknowledges Standout Posters at DS17
   [76][Awards.png]
   [77]Get Involved
   [78]James H. Wilkinson Prize
   [79][Research.png]
   [80]Research
   [81]Deep Learning Models in Finance
   [82][Research.png]
   [83]Careers
   [84]Beyond UQ: Dealing with Deep Uncertainty
   [85][Announcements.png]
   [86]Announcements
   [87]Illinois Students Named Champions in National M3 Challenge
   [88][CurrentIssue.png]
   [89]Current Issue
   [90]Electricity Demand Response and Optimal Contract Theory
   [91][ResearchNuggets.png]
   [92]Research Nuggets
   [93]Modeling Invasive Activity: Zebra Mussels’ Infiltration of
   North American Rivers
   [94]See More News
   Article Tags


   SIAM News







   3600 Market Street, 6th Floor, Philadelphia, PA 19104
   [101]webmaster@siam.org Copyright 2016 Society for Industrial
   and Applied Mathematics

    [101] email:webmaster@siam.org


