Colored Operads

   Donald Yau
   Publisher:
   American Mathematical Society
   Publication Date:
   2016
   Number of Pages:
   428
   Format:
   Hardcover
   Series:
   Graduate Studies in Mathematics 170
   Price:
   89.00
   ISBN:
   9781470427238
   Category:
   Monograph



   [Reviewed by
   Ittay Weiss
   , on
   11/6/2016
   ]

   Before the review proper I must address the color issue. The
   term “colored operad” is an unfortunate historical artifact
   originating from the fact that the first operads considered
   were all monochromatic, they all had just one color so there
   was no need to name this concept at all. But then certain
   variants of the original operads appeared and those were
   somewhat hard to digest. Those variants were in fact nothing
   but operads with two colors, and soon thereafter operads with
   any set of colors became part of the package. However, using
   “colors” to refer to the objects of an operad is simply an
   ad-hoc reaction to the need to distinguish among different
   things, and why not colorfully. But our understanding of
   operads has shifted significantly; we now know that an operad
   is simply the multi-input version of a category. The usage of
   the term “colored operad,” which was never prevalent, is now
   nearly extinct. It is unfortunate to see the title reiterating
   a temporary ill-chosen term! One must hope never to see a book
   titled Introduction to Colored Monoids instead of Introduction
   to Categories.

   Operad theory is an increasingly important area of research
   with applications in mathematics, physics, and computer
   science. An introductory level book on the subject is very much
   welcomed, particularly that such texts are scarce; the only
   other introductory level text is Leinster’s [309]Higher
   Operads; Higher Categories — a very different book in style and
   scope.


   The book can be described as a gentle introduction to operads
   which boldly includes all of the technical details — with a
   strong emphasis on the words “all” and “boldly” — but avoids
   getting deep into the theory of operads. It can be likened to
   learning to swim in shallow water, paying full attention to
   each and every detail of the instruction. While we might
   certainly catch glimpses of the interesting objects that lie
   further ahead in the deep waters, they remain just beyond
   sight.

   I will first address my reasons for this classification of the
   book, which is divided into four parts dealing with a graph
   formalism, an introduction to categories oriented toward
   operads, operads and their algebras, and free operads. The
   first part, the graph formalism, is particularly simple, easily
   accessible even to beginning undergraduate students. I find
   spending about 90 pages on it to be excessive, particularly
   considering the intended audience. This is reflected in the
   rather meager selection of exercises in part I — the material
   is too simple to allow for challenging exercises. Part II, the
   introduction to categories, concentrates on the topics that
   lead most naturally to operads. It involves most of the
   standard ingredients which are of a level of sophistication
   suitable for the target audience (i.e, adjunctions and Mac
   Lane’s coherence theorem) but not all (e.g., (co)limits). Part
   III introduces operads and their algebras, discussing a handful
   of examples, and then part IV is a study of free operads.

   These choices of topics and their locations in the book are
   somewhat odd. I feel strongly that the category theory
   presented in part II really ought to be considered a
   prerequisite for reading the book (anybody seriously interested
   in operads should be expected to master a beginner’s knowledge
   of category theory). It would have been best placed as chapter
   0. Part I, on the other hand, is highly technical, yet
   extremely intuitive and very simple — perhaps it should have
   been an appendix. Again, there is nothing stopping the reader
   from treating it as such. That would leave Part III and Part IV
   as the main topic of the book — a well written introduction to
   operads with much attention to the construction of free
   operads. Luckily, there is little to stop a reader from
   beginning with Part III.

   What the book does quite well is provide a very well-written
   and highly detailed treatment of the basics of operads. Operad
   theory is notorious for classical [310]introductory [311]texts
   that are rather hard to follow, with many of the technicalities
   that this book puts in broad daylight only glossed upon (at
   best). There is certainly a need for a book which does
   everything slowly and carefully, for the sake of many a student
   finding the classical texts too much to handle. The book
   contains much valuable information and detail, which can
   potentially save a struggling newcomer into operad land many
   hours of frustration. In light of that, for the sake of an
   uninitiated wanderer facing the dilemma of having several
   sources to choose from, I would like to suggest a recommended
   way of reading the book: Treat one quarter as chapter 0,
   another one quarter as an appendix, with the remaining second
   half of the book a valuable, friendly, and well-written
   introduction to the basics of operads.


   I will detail some dangers one may face if one follows the book
   in its intended order. First and foremost, the staggering
   amount of information that precedes the definition of operad
   may lead a reader to incorrectly infer that an operad is a
   terribly complicated thing to define; this is a dangerous
   misconception. Furthermore, Part I is, as already stated, very
   simple, but it is also very boring. The only motivation
   provided for traversing those 90 pages or so is that these
   concepts will be used later on, primarily in parts III and IV.
   That is certainly true, and that is why it should have been an
   appendix. Moreover, since the material really is very shallow a
   student reading it with ease may feel she is an operad savant.
   But understanding Part I with ease does not a talented operad
   theorist make. Part II, which should have been chapter 0, is a
   good introduction to category theory, but it is a bit of a
   missed opportunity since all there really is there is a
   geodesic to monoidal categories. The treatment in Mac Lane’s
   [312]Categories for the Working Mathematician is, in my
   opinion, better.


   So, if not as a first introduction to operads, how should one
   best use the book? I find the book highly useful as a companion
   to be consulted while going through any of the other texts on
   operads. When the going gets tough while one takes the first
   steps of reading a text where operads are used, one may find
   comfort in having a companion which will go through some of the
   details at great length.

   There are however a few more warnings worth paying attention
   to. The rest of the review aims at providing further
   suggestions to the interested reader.

   The graph formalism presented is, in my view, very unfortunate.
   First, it must be realized that the particularities of the
   formalism are irrelevant to the theory of operads, and further
   that it is not so much graphs that are of interest but rather
   trees. There are many formalisms for trees and not all are
   created equal. Different formalisms may suit different
   scenarios more than others. I find that point not to be
   sufficiently clearly emphasized to the reader. The literature
   on operads exhibits a plethora of tree formalisms, and it can
   be said with a fair amount of certainty that few experts care
   much about which formalism is used. That may be attributed to
   the fact that an ill-chosen formalism quickly becomes a burden
   rather than an asset when trying to use it to precisely get
   ideas across and validating theorems. The graph formalism
   chosen here is certainly among the common ones in the
   literature but, it is not optimally suited for operads, and I
   will explain why.

   The graph formalism the author chose is the classical
   graph-theoretic one: a graph consists of a set of vertices and
   a set of edges where the edges are formed as pairs of vertices.
   In other words, the vertices are basic and the edges connect
   vertices. But there is a dual approach in which the edges are
   primitive and the vertices consist of information indicating
   which edges are put together to form the vertex. Most texts on
   operads (perhaps implicitly) take the latter approach, and for
   very good reasons.

   Let us explain the advantages of the edge-centric formalism
   over the vertex-centric one. The need, in chapter one, to
   distinguish between what the author calls abstract vertices vs.
   vertices, is completely eliminated in the edge-centric
   formalism. Then, in chapter four (on page 45, particularly
   (4.2.2)), taking an edge-centric approach the operation of
   collapsing an internal edge is simplified, and in particular
   there is no need at all to identity vertices (since vertices do
   not exist as primitive objects). It should also be noted that
   the title “Associativity” for Section 4.4 is not quite in
   agreement with the content (the section should have been named
   “Commutativity”, or, better yet, it should have been named
   “Associativity and Commutativity” with the content suitably
   amended). Next, the grafting of trees in Chapter five is also
   greatly simplified in an edge-centric approach, particularly if
   one is content with grafting to be performed along outer edges
   and only to be defined along identical edges (in particular, no
   identifications are required). In sum, the graph formalism
   presented does not lend itself easily for the purposes of
   operad theory, and thus quickly becomes a burden rather than an
   illuminating and supporting conglomerate of ideas.

   Part III starts off very well with a highly readable and
   friendly Chapter 10 presenting clear motivation for the
   definition of operad. Any reader who is even only partly
   familiar with categories can begin reading right there. Chapter
   11 then delves into the definition of operad in a fairly
   standard fashion, followed by examining some variants and very
   elementary examples. Chapter 12 I find very odd, as it is, in
   light of the clear motivation and detail given in Chapter 10
   and Chapter 11, simply the comment that since operads are the
   multi-input version of categories, categories are the special
   case of operads with only unary operations.

   The reason operads exist is for their algebras, and these are
   presented in Chapter 13. Here I find the presentation to be
   suboptimal. The author follows directly in the footsteps of the
   first definitions of operads and their algebras, but that is
   not in line with the theme of the book, viewing operads as an
   extension of categories. It is much clearer to first consider
   morphisms of operads, and then define the algebra of an operad
   enriched in a monoidal category simply as a morphism from the
   former to the latter (after noticing that every monoidal
   category is canonically an operad, and emphasize the role of
   Mac Lane’s coherence theorem for this result to be true).
   Something along these lines is attempted in Section 13.9, but
   it falls short of truly illuminating the concept of an operad
   algebra simply as a morphism of operads with a very particular
   choice of codomain.
     __________________________________________________________

   Ittay Weiss is a Teaching Fellow at the University of
   Portsmouth, UK.

   See the table of contents in [313]pdf format.
   Tags:
   [314]Category Theory




