[15][Makeover] Systems of Equations


   By [16]Dan Meyer • December 19, 2016 • [17]17 Comments


   Here is the oldest kind of math problem that exists:

   Some of you knew what kind of problem this was before you had
   finished the first sentence. You could blur your eyes and
   without reading the words you saw that there were two unknown
   quantities and two facts about them and you knew this was a
   problem about solving a system of equations.

   Whoever wrote this problem knows that students struggle to
   learn how to solve systems and struggle to remain awake while
   solving systems. I presume that’s why they added a context to
   the system and it’s why they scaffolded the problem all the way
   to the finish line.

   How could we improve this problem – and other problems like
   this problem?

   I [18]asked that question on Twitter and I received responses
   from, roughly speaking, two camps.


   One group recommended we change the adjectives and nouns. That
   we make the problem more real or more relevant by changing the
   objects in the problem. For example, instead of analyzing an
   animated movie, we could first survey our classes for the movie
   genres they like most and use those in the problem.

   This makeover is common, in my experience. I don’t doubt it’s
   effective for some students, particularly those students
   already adept at the formal, operational work of solving a
   system of equations through elimination. The work is already
   easy for those students, so they’re happy to see a more
   familiar context. But I question how much that strategy
   interests students who aren’t already adept at that work.

   Another strategy is to ignore the adjectives and nouns and
   change the verbs, to change the work students do, to ask
   students to do informal, relational work first, and use it as a
   resource for the formal, operational work later.

   This makeover is hard, in my experience. It’s especially hard
   if you long ago became adept at the formal, operational work of
   solving a system of equations through elimination. This
   makeover requires asking yourself, “[19]What is the core
   concept here and what are early ways of understanding it?”


   No adjectives or nouns were harmed during this makeover. Only
   verbs.

     The theater you run charges $4 for child tickets and $12 for
     adult tickets.
    1. What’s a large amount of money you could make?
    2. What’s a small amount of money you could make?
    3. Okay, your no-good kid brother is working the cash
       register. He told you he made:
       He’s lying about at least one of those. Which ones? How do
       you know?

   This makeover claims that the core concept of systems is that
   they’re about relationships between quantities. Sometimes we
   know so many relationships between those quantities that
   they’re only satisfied and solved by one set of those
   quantities. Other times, lots of sets solve those relationships
   and other times those relationships are so constrained that
   they’re never solved.

   So we’ve deleted one of the relationships here. Then we’ve ask
   students to find solutions to the remaining relationship by
   asking them for a small and large amount of money. There are
   lots of possible solutions. Then we’ve asked students to
   encounter the fact that not every amount of money can be a
   solution to the relationship. (See: [20]Kristin Gray, [21]Kevin
   Hall, and [22]Julie Reulbach for more on this approach.)


   From there, I’m inclined to take Sunday’s sum (one he wasn’t
   lying about) and ask students how they know it might be
   legitimate. They’ll offer different pairs of child and adult
   tickets. “My no-good kid brother says he sold 342 tickets. Can
   you tell me if that’s possible?”

   Slowly they’ll systematize their guessing-and-checking. It
   might be appropriate here to visualize their
   guessing-and-checking on a graph, and later to help students
   understand how they could have used algebraic notation to form
   that visualization quickly, at which point the relationships
   start to make even more sense.

   If we only understand math as formal, operational work, then
   our only hope for helping a student learn that work is lots and
   lots of scaffolding and our only hope for helping her remain
   awake through that work is a desperate search for a context
   that will send a strong enough jolt of familiarity through her
   cerebral cortex.

   That path is wide. The narrow path asks us to understand that
   formal, operational ideas exists first as informal, relational
   ideas in the mind of the student, that our job is devise
   experiences that help students access those ideas and build on
   them.

   BTW. Shout out to [23]Marian Small and other elementary
   educators for helping me see the value in questions that ask
   about “big” and “small” answers. The question is purposefully
   imprecise and invites students to start poking at the edges of
   the relationship.
   [24]makeovermonday


   About [25]Dan Meyer
   I'm Dan and this is my blog. I'm a former high school math
   teacher and current head of teaching at [26]Desmos. [27]More
   here.



