To learn something well, people need to know the underlying system
within that area of expertise

   Shortly after enrolling my daughters and myself in an abacus
   class, we discovered that the practice relies on a math
   strategy known as [61]decomposition, which makes computation
   easier by breaking numbers down into their component parts. So
   students are encouraged to think about how certain numbers have
   "complements" or "partners." For instance, 10 is made by
   partnering 7 plus 3 or by partnering 6 plus 4.


   For an actual math problem, consider 5 plus 8. On the abacus,
   you would not add those actual figures. Instead, you would
   "decompose" the numbers and add 10 to the 5 and take away 2 —
   or the partner of 8 — in order to get to the answer: 13.

   It can take a little longer to learn math in this way.
   Certainly it took me a little while to fully grasp this
   approach. But decomposition gives people a better underlying
   sense of how the math actually works. (Interestingly, my kids
   didn’t find the approach all that novel, since a decomposition
   approach is embedded in the new [62]Common Core math
   standards.)


   Tom Sato, Stevenson’s instructor, has taught abacus for more
   than a decade, and he argues that the abacus's more systemic
   approach is one of the key benefits of the practice. “I see a
   lot of kids who struggle with math because they know that 1 and
   1 is 2. But when they see 2 plus 2, they don’t know what to
   do,” Sato told me. “The way we teach it, we try to make a
   framework for students to work in, and the ones who are
   successful are the ones who understand the system.”

   This idea extends well past math, and today a growing number of
   experts believe that understanding systems knowledge is key to
   richer forms of learning. Cognitive scientist [63]Lindsey
   Richland, for instance, argues that to build concepts, to solve
   problems, to engage in any sort of critical thought, people
   need to grapple with patterns within an area of expertise. “The
   underpinnings of the ability to do higher-order thinking really
   comes down to reasoning about relationships,” she says.


   As an example, take learning about the ocean. To develop
   reasoning, to create a systems understanding, Richland argues
   that people shouldn't dwell overly on standalone facts. Rather,
   they should examine questions like: What happens to the ocean
   if the level of salt goes up? What’s the difference between
   oceans and lakes? How do reefs impact ocean currents?

   We can do this ourselves. If you're learning something new, ask
   yourself hypothetical questions. By asking "what if" questions,
   people gain more of a systems understanding. So if people want
   to know more interior design, they might ask themselves: How
   would I design a bathroom if my client were wealthy and loved
   gold? How would I design a bathroom if my client were young and
   disabled? How would I design a bathroom with a nautical motif?

   Take any bit of literature as another example. People can gain
   a lot by discussing the implications of counterfactuals. Want
   to better understand Romeo and Juliet? Then consider what would
   have happened if the young lovers had not died. Would the
   Capulets and Montagues have continued their feud? Would the
   lovers have lived happily ever after?

   In this sense, the ancient abacus is nothing new. As Sato told
   me, “The big question is: Do you just memorize certain things?”
   he said. “Or do you try and see how it all fits together?”


