Pages




Thursday, March 31, 2016

Embrace Mistakes

   By Eduardo Briceño
   [7][briceno.jpg]
   Mistakes can be frustrating, embarrassing, and disheartening,
   which may lead us to always want to avoid them. But avoiding
   mistakes keeps us from taking on challenges we can learn from.
   If we’re inside Hermes, the spacecraft in the book and film The
   Martian, calculating the velocity needed to intersect Mark
   Watney and bring him home, we need to get the right answer or
   he’ll die. Ideally, we want an expert astrodynamicist to work
   on that problem using skills she has already mastered so that
   she doesn’t make an error. But if that astrodynamicist had
   never challenged herself to tackle problems beyond what she
   knew, inevitably making errors and learning from them along the
   way, she never would have built the expertise needed to become
   an elite member of NASA.
   Mistakes to Avoid or Pursue
   Distinguishing mistakes we want to pursue from those we want to
   avoid helps us learn more effectively.
   If we desire a high rate of improvement, we must pursue stretch
   mistakes. These happen when we work on skills we haven’t
   mastered. If we’re attempting a task that we don’t know how to
   do yet, we’re bound to make mistakes. When we try to solve a
   tough math problem, we can learn a lot by reviewing our work
   and identifying where we made mistakes and what we can learn
   from them. We pursue stretch mistakes not by trying to do
   things incorrectly, but by attempting tasks that are
   challenging. Thereby we learn and grow.
   The aha-moment mistake happens when we do something as we
   intended, but then realize it was a mistake to do so. For
   example, if our astrodynamicist- in-training is trying to
   predict the trajectory of an object moving very fast, she may
   apply Newton’s laws of motion and then realize that the object
   is moving in ways not predicted by the model. That may lead her
   to discover that she must take into account Einstein’s special
   relativity. Although we can’t seek out aha- moment mistakes,
   when they happen, we can treasure them as learning
   opportunities.
   Some mistakes are not as desirable. We want to avoid sloppy
   mistakes, which are errors we make when doing something we have
   already mastered. But we’re human and sometimes make them. When
   we do, let’s learn from them. We can examine what led to the
   error and decide how we could change our processes to avoid
   them. Perhaps it was a lack of focus—sloppy mistakes can be
   good reminders to minimize distractions, slow down, and pay
   attention to the details.
   Finally, we can minimize high-stakes mistakes— mistakes that
   could have disastrous consequences. A high-stakes situation
   could be one in which lives are at risk, such as when saving
   Mark Watney or designing a bridge.
   Non-life-threatening situations may also be consid- ered high
   stakes, such as a college entrance exam or job interview. In
   those situations, we may focus on what we have mastered rather
   than on what we’re learning. After we perform, whether
   successful or not, we can reflect on what we can learn from
   those experiences, back to seeking out new challenges.
   Some teachers (and our grade-conscious education system) may
   inadvertently send the message that mis- takes are undesirable.
   But learners who don’t take the difficult classes and who don’t
   try the challenging problems miss the opportunities to make
   mistakes, analyze the thinking that led to them, learn from
   such confusion, and improve. We learn the most when we view
   mistakes as opportunities to enhance our abilities.
   So what challenge will you tackle next, and what will you do
   when you make your next mistake?
   Eduardo Briceño is the cofounder and CEO of Mindset Works. He
   and his colleagues write regularly at [8]mindsetworks.com.
    Twitter: @ebriceno8
   Posted by [9]Mathematical Association of America at [10]1:23 PM



