How I Became The NPR Math Guy

Most people think that mathematics is just about numbers, but that’s
not true at all.

   03/04/2017 05:59 pm ET | Updated Mar 07, 2017
   [58befef71500003b16abdbf5.jpeg]
   ferar via Getty Images


   Since 1995, Stanford mathematician Keith Devlin has intrigued
   (and occasionally baffled) listeners to NPR’s popular Saturday
   morning magazine program ‘[97]Weekend Edition’ with Scott
   Simon, with his discussions of mathematical topics that somehow
   manage to find their way into the news. It all started by
   chance (mostly).


   As a young mathematics graduate student at the University of
   Bristol in my native England, back at the end of the 1960s, my
   role models were the mathematicians who had made major
   mathematical discoveries—mathematical giants such as Leonard
   Euler, Karl Friedrich Gauss, Pierre De Fermat, and Kurt Gödel.
   Like many young people starting out on a mathematical career, I
   dreamt of joining the ranks of the greatest—of proving a major
   theorem or solving a difficult problem that had baffled the
   best minds for decades.

   Some of my contemporaries succeeded. In 1963, only a few years
   ahead of me, the young American mathematician Paul Cohen solved
   Cantor’s Continuum Problem, a puzzle that had resisted all
   attempts at resolution for over sixty years. But as happens to
   the vast majority of mathematicians, eventually I had to settle
   for far less.

   During the course of my career, like most of the world’s 25,000
   professional mathematicians listed in the International
   Directory of Mathematicians, I solved a number of minor
   problems and proved several respectable, but largely
   unremarkable theorems. I taught at various universities, in
   Scotland, Norway, Germany, Canada, and the United States (where
   I moved permanently in 1987), and I wrote a number of textbooks
   for mathematicians and students. Again, fairly typical career
   moves for many academic mathematicians, though perhaps I moved
   around more than many and ended up writing more books than
   most.

   But along the way, almost by accident, I discovered another
   talent, perhaps my true calling: an ability to explain often
   obscure, advanced mathematical ideas to a general audience. I
   found that, through my words, I could make mathematics come
   alive for others not versed in the subject.

     I found that, through my words, I could make mathematics
     come alive for others not versed in the subject.

   It was an unplanned sequence of events that resulted in my
   pursuing a second career path as a public expositor of
   mathematics. In the early 1980s, I grew increasingly frustrated
   by the fact that magazines and newspapers often carried
   articles on science—biology, physics, chemistry, and so on—but
   hardly ever on mathematics. On the few occasions when they did
   cover mathematics, they did so badly, often getting the main
   idea entirely wrong. In March 1983, I decided to do something
   about the situation, and wrote a short piece and sent it in to
   the British national newspaper The Guardian.

   A few days later, the science editor phoned and informed me
   that they could not publish it. “But,” he said, “I like your
   style. You seem to have a real knack for explaining difficult
   ideas in a way ordinary people can understand.” He encouraged
   me to try again, and my second attempt was published in The
   Guardian on May 12, 1983. Several more pieces also made it into
   print, eliciting some appreciative letters to the editor. As a
   result, when The Guardian launched a weekly, personal computing
   page later that year, it included my new, twice-monthly column
   Micromaths. The column ran without interruption until 1989,
   when my two-year visit to Stanford University in California
   turned into a permanent move to the US.

   I soon discovered that I liked my new found role of
   “expositor”. I have always been passionately interested in all
   aspects of mathematics, and never liked the fact that so many
   people have a completely false impression of this wonderful
   subject. Most people think that mathematics is just about
   numbers, but that’s not true at all. Yes, numbers play an
   important role in the subject, but mathematics is not about
   counting. It’s about pattern and structure. It’s about the
   hidden beauty that lies just beneath the surface of the
   everyday world. I relished the challenge of constantly trying
   to find ways to explain new developments in advanced
   mathematics to the lay readers of my column. The frequent
   appreciative—and occasionally baffled—letters I received from
   readers fueled my commitment even more.

   Encouraged by the success of my column, I began writing books
   and articles for a general readership, including some for the
   business world. I also gave lectures to lay audiences, and
   started to make occasional appearances on radio and television.
   From 1991 to 1997, after moving to the United States in 1987, I
   edited FOCUS, the monthly magazine of the Mathematical
   Association of America, and since January 1996 I have written a
   monthly column, [98]Devlin’s Angle, for the association.


   Early in 1995, I got the break that led to my becoming a
   regular contributor to primetime national radio in the US, with
   the media identity “the Math Guy”. I got a telephone call one
   day from National Public Radio’s Saturday morning news magazine
   show Weekend Edition. The host, Scott Simon, wanted to
   interview me about the solution to the 350-year-old problem
   known as Fermat’s Last Theorem, which became a major news story
   after the Princeton mathematician Andrew Wiles had solved it a
   few months earlier. Never one to say “no” to a new challenge, I
   trotted off to my local NPR affiliate studio to record the
   segment.

   Although Scott and I would not meet for many months—then as now
   we record most of our interviews with me in a studio in
   California and Scott at the NPR studios in Washington D.C.—we
   hit it off immediately over the air. Listeners loved our
   intimate, humorous banter—which from the start has been
   completely unrehearsed and spontaneous. Many wrote in to the
   program to say so. Again, without any planning, I found I had
   another new role, this time a “radio personality,” appearing on
   the show every few weeks. Eventually, I acquired my “stage
   name.” The receptionist at the studio I used soon started to
   greet my arrival with “It’s the math guy.” I mentioned this to
   the Weekend Edition producer one day, and he replied, “Oh,
   that’s what we put you down as on our scheduling board.” And so
   the NPR Math Guy was born.

   This post is adapted from the introduction of Keith Devlin’s
   new book [99]Finding Fibonacci: The Quest to Rediscover the
   Forgotten Mathematical Genius Who Changed the World, published
   this month by Princeton University Press. His Math Guy
   segments, 94 to date, are all available at [100]The Math Guy
   Sound Archive.



