Go BIG or go home? Go BIG.

   cotwright_carla
   img_5773
   img_5772
   img_2923
   imag1213
   drc_msnichols

   Photos – clockwise from upper left:
   1) My official federal portrait
   2) Flight simulator at NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett
   Field, CA
   3) Working at NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA
   4) Tour in Speaker of the House office at the U.S. Capitol
   5) Senate baths at the U.S. Capitol.
   6) With Nichelle Nichols, who played Lieutenant Uhura in “Star
   Trek” at a poster session at NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett
   Field, CA

   Until a few years ago, I was a “wayward” mathematician. I
   thought all I could do was teach and I wanted out. While
   teaching is noble and one of the highest callings, I wanted to
   do something other than my tenure-track position.

   Now don’t get me wrong, I knew mathematicians did more than
   teach. But personally, I had not done a lot of applied
   mathematical work. Nothing wrong with it, I just hadn’t. (My
   area of research was a branch of Combinatorics called Matroid
   Theory.) However, when I started looking I found all kinds of
   employment opportunities.

   When I finished my PhD, there didn’t seem to be a shortage of
   academic jobs. You might not get a position at Research I
   institution, but you could find a tenure-track position at a
   pretty decent institution and be happy. I still see colleges
   and universities hiring for these positions, but when comparing
   the number of open positions to the number of Ph.D. graduates
   annually…there are not enough academic jobs. So what to do? I
   recommend considering jobs outside academia.

   All too often in the MATH community, because of its traditions,
   a common sentiment is one that unless you are tenure-track
   faculty, you’re not a good mathematician. It took time…but I
   got over that nonsense. I wanted to do something different with
   my mathematics.  I went BIG.

   Personally, I have always been civic-minded. I’ve always been
   active in my community – volunteering and helping those in
   need. Academia allows you this fulfillment to a certain
   extent.   So I ask you this…how important is it that we use
   mathematics in everyday places in our communities and across
   society with the critical thinking skills and expert problem
   solving skills? Or use mathematics and technical abilities to
   help solve the world’s problems to help ease society’s woes? Or
   use mathematics to bring forth innovation and technology?

   Mathematics is a versatile language. Just like mathematics,
   critical thinking, problem solving and technical writing are
   equally as versatile.   (Did you realize that you have these
   skills as a mathematician?)

   To transition from academia to government, I broadened my
   experience beyond the classroom by participating in faculty
   research opportunities with the federal government. While
   working with NASA, I studied the relationship between random
   graphs and Bayesian networks to improve methods for determining
   and maintaining systems health in autonomous avionics.   While
   working with the U.S. Navy, I worked with a team to examine
   statistical measures of uncertainty to create techniques for
   use with data integrity problems.

   I also took graduate courses in public policy analysis at a
   local university. Depending on your interests, you may need to
   do some additional training to expand your own skill set.
   Further building on my new skills, I applied for and was
   awarded the AMS Congressional Fellowship. I worked on Capitol
   Hill as a staffer bringing a scientific perspective to the
   halls of Congress.

   Thankfully, on my path to a non-traditional mathematics career,
   I encountered people, including fellow mathematicians, who
   encouraged me to pursue my passion and explore careers where I
   might use both my analytic skills and my soft skills. It hasn’t
   been the easiest thing. I have had to navigate uncharted waters
   and remarket myself for this new world.

   I have increased my personal and professional network to
   include the mathematics community, the broader scientific
   community and the non-scientific community- the community we
   are all a part of.   This encompasses a world bigger than the
   classroom, office or campus.

   After all of this, the next question might be…what can I do if
   I’m interested in positions outside of Academia – Business,
   Industry, Government (BIG)? The BIG Math Network is a great
   place to learn about opportunities and to network with
   like-minded individuals, who are also interested mathematical
   careers in business, government and industry.  Explore this BIG
   website. A good Google search never hurts either.

   Finally, I recommend that you Network.  Talk to those for doing
   types of work the interest you.   Whether you contact a
   researcher at a Federal lab or congressional fellow/staffer,
   most people will be glad to talk to you about their experiences
   and provide information for similar lines of work. I’m always
   glad to share my BIG experiences and knowledge with anyone who
   is interested.

   Carla Cotwright-Williams is an IT Fellow/Computer Scientist for
   the Social Security Administration. Email her at
   [31]carla.cotwright@gmail.com.

     [31] mailto:carla.cotwright@gmail.com

   Dr. Cotwright-Williams is featured on the new blog
   [32]Mathematically Gifted and Black.


   Advertisements


