[248]Subscribe to the Hidden Brain podcast!


   What are the odds?

   "The odds are about 18 septillion to one against it happening,"
   Mazur says. A septillion is 1 followed by 24 zeros.

   But if you reframe the question, and calculate the odds that
   anyone — not just you, or Joan Ginther — will win the lottery
   four times, you get much better odds.

   "It's about 5 million to one," Mazur says. And that accounts
   for the number of people playing the lotto, the number of
   lotteries in the world, and the fact that most lottery winners
   use some amount of their "house money" to increase their odds
   of winning again.

   For better or worse, this sort of number-crunching can
   demystify even the most tantalizing coincidences. But that
   doesn't diminish their quirky serendipity.

   Take, for example, one of Joseph Mazur's favorite coincidence
   stories, about the 19th-century French poet Emile Deschamps.

   As a teenager, Deschamps meets a man with a strange name,
   Monsieur de Fortgibu. De Fortgibu is an immigrant from England,
   and he introduces Deschamps to a very English dessert: plum
   pudding.

   Ten years go by. One day, Deschamps passes a Paris restaurant
   that has plum pudding on the menu. He goes inside, only to be
   told the last of the plum pudding was just sold to a gentleman
   sitting in the back.

   "And the waiter calls out loud, 'Mr. de Fortgibu, would you be
   willing to share your plum pudding with this gentleman?' "
   tells Mazur.

   Years pass, and Deschamps is at a dinner party with some
   friends.

   The host announces that an unusual dessert will be served. You
   guessed it — plum pudding. Deschamps jokingly says that one of
   the guests at the party must be Monsieur de Fortgibu.

   "Well, soon the doorbell rings and Mr. de Fortgibu is
   announced," says Mazur. "And he enters, he's an old man by now,
   but Deschamps recognizes him. And Mr. de Fortgibu looks around
   and he realizes that he's in the wrong apartment." He was
   invited to a dinner party — but not there.

   This sort of coincidence defies mathematical explanation.
   There's only one way to describe it — magical.

   The Hidden Brain Podcast is hosted by Shankar Vedantam and
   produced Maggie Penman, Chris Benderev, Jennifer Schmidt, Kara
   McGuirk-Allison and Renee Klahr. Our supervising producer is
   Tara Boyle. To subscribe to our newsletter, click [249]here.
   You can also follow us on Twitter [250]@hiddenbrain, and listen
   for Hidden Brain stories each week on your local public radio
   station.





    [254] javascript:void(0);


