[16]The employers’ argument for parental leave


   [17]22 Dec
   As you may be aware, I’m having a baby in three months.  My
   spouse’s work offers one week of parental leave to non-primary
   caretakers of new babies, so I decided to put an hour in of
   internet research to see if I could make a little report that
   he could send on to HR or someone who might be interested.  And
   then since I did that, I figured I’d post it to here!  Happy
   holidays dear reader!  Maybe this will be helpful to someone.
   The main sources are all freely available on the internet.
   Overall takeaways:

       important for Millennials and young workers and increase
       employee retention, as seen in the CWF study as well as the
       California experiment.
       employers, as in California experiment.
       work-life balance, which increases worker happiness and
       thus productivity.
       for the non-gestating employee increases work-life balance
       satisfaction for the gestating employee and retention for
       that employee.

   Here’s the Department of Labor briefing on paternity
   Brief.pdf.  Selected quotes (sources mentioned are available at
   the end of this short briefing:)

       took leaves of two weeks or more were much more likely to
       be actively involved in their child’s care nine months
       after birth – including feeding, changing diapers, and
       getting up in the night.6 Studies from other countries have
       confirmed that fathers who take more paternity leave have
       higher satisfaction with parenting and increased engagement
       in caring for their children.7”
       balance, and nearly half of men surveyed report that the
       demands of work interfere with family life.11”
       the U.S., nine of out ten reported that it would be
       important when looking for a new job that the employer
       offered paid parental leave, and six out of ten considered
       it very or extremely important. These numbers were even
       higher for millennial workers.23”

   Here’s a 2010 California study on Paid Family Leave, which was
   implemented in 2004 and offered employees six weeks of leave at
   55% of salary (followed by New Jersey and
   mily-leave-1-2011.pdf.  This offers concrete evidence of the
   effects of paid family leave in general.

       effect” or “no noticeable effect” on productivity (89
       percent), profitability/performance (91 percent), turnover
       (96 percent), and employee morale (99 percent).

   Here’s a Center for Work and Family (out of Boston College)
   report on paternity
   s/BCCWF_The_New_Dad_2014_FINAL.157170735.pdf

       were mostly (over 90%) well-educated professionals:
       time off should be taken consecutively beginning with the
       birth of their children. More than 75% preferred the option
       to take the paid time off when it was most needed after the
       birth, within a specified period of time such as six
       months. For example, over a six month period after the
       birth of their child, they could take two weeks at the
       beginning and then additional days off as needed up to the
       maximum amount allowed.”
       employers’ implementations, including spotlights on Ernst
       and Young, Deloitte, and American Express.  “• For policies
       that didn’t differentiate between primary and secondary
       caregivers, fathers were given an average of two weeks of
       paid leave • For policies that did have designated
       provisions for fathers who were primary or secondary
       caregivers, fathers as primary caregivers were given an
       average of about eight weeks, which was approximately three
       times as much as the leave offered to secondary caregivers”
       that the most appropriate amount of time for fathers to
       have off for paternity leave is between two and four weeks…
       76% of fathers would prefer the option of not taking all
       their time off immediately following the birth of their
       children”

   If no one wants to read this post , here’s a great and [21]easy
   to read article from ThinkProgress that similarly cites a bunch
   of studies and includes anecdotal evidence titled “How Everyone
   Benefits When New Fathers Take Paid Leave.”  I highly recommend
   this article.
   Advertisements



