[69]The Deceptions of Luck


   By David J. Hand

   Would you say you are a lucky person? Have unexpected things
   turned up which made your life better? I don’t mean something
   as extreme as a major lottery win, but perhaps getting a job
   because a stronger candidate dropped out...[70]READ MORE


   In the chemical world, scale defines identity: Add a proton to
   the nucleus of an atom, and a whole new element emerges. But
   for super-heavy elements, a very large atomic number means a
   very fleeting existence. Pack too many protons together, and
   you’ll likely find it’s impossible to make an atom at all.

   Beyond uranium (92), the force that repels positively-charged
   protons (the Coulomb force) begins to exceed the force binding
   them together (the nuclear force). So as elements get heavier,
   they become more and more unstable. This explains why (as far
   as anyone knows) no elements larger than uranium occur
   naturally, says Christoph Duellmann, a nuclear chemist at the
   GSI Helmholtz Center for Heavy Ion Research and Johannes
   Gutenberg University Mainz, in Germany.

   Scientists have artificially created heavier elements by
   smashing together atomic nuclei in particle accelerators.
   (Duellmann and his colleagues confirmed the existence of
   ununseptium—element 117—last year.) These atoms are
   short-lived, however. While the most abundant isotope of
   uranium has a half-life of 4.5 billion years, an isotope of
   einsteinium (99) has a half-life as long as 472 days. The
   heaviest element ever made, ununoctium (118), lasts for less
   than 1 millisecond.

   Duellmann speculates that a theoretical element with about 170
   protons or more would have a half-life of less than 1
   hundred-trillionth of a second—the time it takes to create an
   electron shell. “Hence it is no atom,” he says.

   slow adapter: The Japanese canopy plant has the largest genome
   of any living organism, at 150 billion base pairs.Wikipedia

   The largest genome is the slowest to adapt

   If you unraveled the DNA in a single human cell—all 3.2 billion
   base pairs—it would stretch 2 meters. That length, however,
   wouldn’t look so impressive next to the largest genome known to
   science, which would reach 100 meters. This
   150-billion-base-pair molecule belongs to the white-flowered
   Japanese canopy plant Paris japonica.

   Genome size varies widely among species, and it’s largely a
   mystery why some organisms evolved larger genomes than others.
   “There is no relationship between genome size and organism
   complexity,” says T. Ryan Gregory, an evolutionary biologist at
   the University of Guelph, in Canada. “There are grasshoppers
   with five times more DNA than humans.” Even some single-celled
   protists have genomes much larger than ours.

   Such outsized genomes grow by accumulating non-coding, or
   “junk,” DNA through copying mistakes during reproduction or
   when [71]offspring inherit more than one set of a parent’s
   chromosomes. The latter condition, known as polyploidy, is
   common among plants, which may explain why they have some of
   the largest genomes found in nature. Most animal genomes are
   smaller than 5 billion base pairs. The genomes of flowering
   plants, meanwhile, average about 6 billion base pairs, while
   those of non-flowering plants average about 18 billion.


   Big genomes come with big disadvantages, says Ilia Leitch, a
   plant geneticist at the United Kingdom’s Royal Botanic Gardens,
   Kew, who headed the team that measured Paris japonica’s genome
   in 2010. Larger genomes take longer to copy, slowing an
   organism’s rate of growth, reproduction, and ultimately
   adaptation. For example, in Arabidopsis species (tiny relatives
   of mustard plants), which have genomes of around 135 million
   base pairs, reproductive cell division takes about 33 hours. In
   Paris japonica, Leitch estimates, this process takes six to
   eight weeks.

   Larger genomes also require larger cells to hold all that
   genetic material. The size difference may be slight, but it can
   significantly impact cellular processes. In animals, for
   instance, larger blood cells are less efficient at delivering
   oxygen. That’s why animals with high metabolisms, such as birds
   and bats, tend to have especially small genomes, Gregory says.

   brainiac: At 11 pounds, the African elephant’s brain is more
   than three times larger than a human’s.Lorena Kaz

   The largest brain isn’t the smartest

   The sperm whale brain tops the size charts at 20 pounds, about
   six times larger than our 3-pound one. And that’s about the
   limit when it comes to mass. Brains can’t grow much larger
   because the weight would begin cutting off blood flow to the
   arteries that feed into it.

   For non-primates, this size ceiling also puts a cap on
   intelligence because it limits the number of neurons—and hence
   neural connections—that can be packed into the cerebral cortex,
   the region responsible for higher brain function. According to
   studies led by Suzana Herculano-Houzel, a neuroscientist at the
   Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, bigger non-primate brains
   also tend to have bigger individual neurons, reducing the
   benefit of size. While the average mass of a cerebral mouse
   neuron is about 8 billionths of a gram, for instance, the
   equivalent elephant neuron weighs in around 181 billionths of a
   gram.

   In primates, however, evolution bucked this trend. By housing
   smaller neurons weighing about 30 billionths of a
   gram—somewhere “between a rat and a rabbit,” Herculano-Houzel
   says—the primate cortex can cram more neurons into a smaller
   space. The human cerebral cortex has about 16 billion
   neurons—more than any other animal—giving us a clear cognitive
   advantage. By comparison, an elephant’s cerebral cortex is
   twice as massive as a human’s, but it has only one-third as
   many neurons.

   the Trembling Giant: Pando is a genetically identical colony of
   a single quaking aspen. Its 47,000 trunks all share a common
   root system, making it the biggest living organism by mass.
   Wikipedia

   The world’s largest organism is becoming infertile

   At 6,600 tons, the biggest living organism by mass is about 33
   times larger than the leviathan of the sea, the blue whale, and
   about three times larger than the towering land giant, the
   sequoia. Pando, also known as the Trembling Giant, is a
   genetically identical colony of a single quaking aspen that has
   spread slowly in Utah over tens of thousands of years. Its
   47,000 trunks share a common root system, from which it sprouts
   new clones.

   This growth scheme allows Pando to avoid factors that usually
   limit size in single-stem plants, including the ability to lift
   water to great heights, says Michael Grant, an ecologist and
   evolutionary biologist at the University of Colorado Boulder.
   In theory, Pando could keep growing indefinitely. And so far,
   it has thrived with just the right amount of wildfires,
   mudslides, and avalanches, which have kept taller competitors
   at bay.

   But Pando isn’t immune to the ravages of time, and its great
   age—which has enabled its great size—may be its Achilles’ heel.
   DNA studies show that aspen colonies accumulate genetic
   mutations as they get older, impairing their production of
   pollen. Without pollen, the colony would not be able to
   reproduce sexually, reducing the diversity of its gene pool,
   and making it less robust in the face of disease or climate
   change.

   seeing stars: IC 1101 is the largest known galaxy in the
   universe. It’s thought to contain around 100 trillion
   stars.Wikimedia

   The largest galaxy is birthing fewer and fewer stars^[72]1

     [72] javascript:;

   The Milky Way, with its hundreds of billions of stars, is a
   drop in a bucket compared to IC 1101, the largest known galaxy
   in the universe. Thought to contain around 100 trillion stars,
   this elliptical giant spans 6 million light-years, 60 times the
   diameter of our own Milky Way.

   Such super-giant galaxies are rare, elderly specimens—home to
   mostly old stars formed when the nearly 14-billion-year-old
   universe was still young. How they got so big is unknown, says
   Richard Bower, a cosmologist at the University of Durham, in
   the U.K. Some might have collided with like-sized galaxies and
   merged together. Others might have cannibalized their smaller
   galactic neighbors.

   Young galaxies grow by birthing new stars, formed when clouds
   of dust and gas collapse under their own gravitational pull
   into hot, dense cores. But as galaxies age and expand, star
   formation slows, Bower says. When galaxies become just slightly
   more massive than the Milky Way, the black holes at their
   centers become active, shooting high-energy jets. These
   powerful winds drive out gasses that give rise to stars, slowly
   draining a galaxy of star-making matter.

   As the universe expands, super-giant galaxies such as IC 1101
   may continue to grow through mergers and acquisitions. But the
   rate of growth will get slower and slower as the ingredients
   for stars get used up and galaxies drift apart. “Because the
   observable universe is a finite size, there is a limit on the
   biggest galaxy we’re going to see,” Bower says. “We’ve probably
   seen it already.”

   [73]Jeremy Hsu is a science and technology journalist based in
   NYC. He currently writes for publications such as Scientific
   American, Popular Science and IEEE Spectrum.



