The Jam Index

   In the broadest sense, physical principles have been applied to
   cancer since long before physics existed as a discipline. The
   ancient Greek physician Hippocrates gave cancer its name when
   he referred to it as a “crab,” comparing the shape of a tumor
   and its surrounding veins to a carapace and legs.

   But those solid tumors do not [20]kill more than 8 million
   people annually. Once tumor cells strike out on their own and
   metastasize to new sites in the body, drugs and other therapies
   rarely do more than prolong a patient’s life for a few years.


   Biologists often view cancer primarily as a genetic program
   gone wrong, with mutations and epigenetic changes producing
   cells that don’t behave the way they should: Genes associated
   with cell division and growth may be turned up, and genes for
   programmed cell death may be turned down. To a small but
   growing number of physicists, however, the shape-shifting and
   behavior changes in cancer cells evoke not an errant genetic
   program but a phase transition.

   The phase transition — a change in a material’s internal
   organization between ordered and disordered states — is a
   bedrock concept in physics. Anyone who has watched ice melt or
   water boil has witnessed a phase transition. Physicists have
   also identified such transitions in magnets, crystals, flocking
   birds and even [21]cells (and cellular components) placed in
   artificial environments.


   But compared to a homogeneous material like water or a magnet —
   or even a collection of identical cells in a dish — cancer is a
   hot mess. Cancers vary widely depending on the individual and
   the organ they develop in. Even a single tumor comprises a
   mind-boggling jumble of cells with different shapes, sizes and
   protein compositions. Such complexities can make biologists
   wary of a general theoretical framework. But they don’t daunt
   physicists. “Biologists are more trained to look at complexity
   and differences,” said the physicist [22]Krastan Blagoev, who
   directs a National Science Foundation program that funds work
   on theoretical physics in living systems. “Physicists try to
   look at what’s common and extract behaviors from the
   commonness.”


   In a demonstration of this approach, the physicists [23]Andrea
   Liu, now of the University of Pennsylvania, and [24]Sidney
   Nagel of the University of Chicago [25]published a brief
   commentary in Nature in 1998 about the process of jamming. They
   described familiar examples: traffic jams, piles of sand, and
   coffee beans stuck together in a grocery-store hopper. These
   are all individual items held together by an external force so
   that they resemble a solid. Liu and Nagel put forward the
   provocative suggestion that jamming could be a previously
   unrecognized phase transition, a notion that physicists, after
   more than a decade of debate, have now accepted.


   Though not the first mention of jamming in the scientific
   literature, Liu and Nagel’s paper set off what Fredberg calls
   “a deluge” among physicists. (The paper has been cited more
   than 1,400 times.) Fredberg realized that cells in lung tissue,
   which he had spent much of his career studying, are closely
   packed in a similar way to coffee beans and sand. In 2009 he
   and colleagues published [26]the first paper suggesting that
   jamming could hold cells in tissues in place, and that an
   unjamming transition could mobilize some of those cells, a
   possibility that could have implications for asthma and other
   diseases.


   The paper appeared amid a growing recognition of the importance
   of mechanics, and not just genetics, in directing cell
   behavior, Fredberg said. “People had always thought that the
   mechanical implications were at the most downstream end of the
   causal cascade, and at the most upstream end are genetic and
   epigenetic factors,” he said. “Then people discovered that
   physical forces and mechanical events actually can be upstream
   of genetic events — that cells are very aware of their
   mechanical microenvironments.”

   [27]Lisa Manning, a physicist at Syracuse University, read
   Fredberg’s paper and decided to put his idea into action. She
   and colleagues used a two-dimensional model of cells that are
   connected along edges and at vertices, filling all space. The
   model yielded an order parameter — a measurable number that
   quantifies a material’s internal order — that they called the
   “shape index.” The shape index relates the perimeter of a
   two-dimensional slice of the cell and its total surface area.
   “We made what I would consider a ridiculously strict
   prediction: When that number is equal to 3.81 or below, the
   tissue is a solid, and when that number is above 3.81, that
   tissue is a fluid,” Manning said. “I asked Jeff Fredberg to go
   look at this, [28]and he did, and it worked perfectly.”


   Fredberg saw that lung cells with a shape index above 3.81
   started to mobilize and squeeze past each other. Manning’s
   prediction “came out of pure theory, pure thought,” he said.
   “It’s really an astounding validation of a physical theory.” A
   program officer with the Physical Sciences in Oncology program
   at the National Cancer Institute learned about the results and
   encouraged Fredberg to do a similar analysis using cancer
   cells. The program has given him funding to look for signatures
   of jamming in breast-cancer cells.

   Meanwhile, [29]Josef Käs, a physicist at Leipzig University in
   Germany, wondered if jamming could help explain puzzling
   behavior in cancer cells. He knew from his own studies and
   those of others that breast and cervical tumors, while mostly
   stiff, also contain soft, mobile cells that stream into the
   surrounding environment. If an unjamming transition was
   fluidizing these cancer cells, Käs immediately envisioned a
   potential response: Perhaps an analysis of biopsies based on
   measurements of tumor cells’ state of jamming, rather than a
   nearly century-old visual inspection procedure, could determine
   whether a tumor is about to metastasize.


   Käs is now using [30]a laser-based tool to look for signatures
   of jamming in tumors, and he hopes to have results later this
   year. In a separate study that is just beginning, he is working
   with Manning and her colleagues at Syracuse to look for phase
   transitions not just in cancer cells themselves, but also in
   the matrix of fibers that surrounds tumors.


   More speculatively, Käs thinks the idea could also yield new
   avenues for therapies that are gentler than the shock-and-awe
   approach clinicians typically use to subdue a tumor. “If you
   can jam a whole tumor, then you have a benign tumor — that I
   believe,” he said. “If you find something which basically jams
   cancer cells efficiently and buys you another 20 years, that
   might be better than very disruptive chemotherapies.” Yet Käs
   is quick to clarify that he is not sure how a clinician would
   induce jamming.


