Pages




Tuesday, March 1, 2016

The Math Myth that permeates “The Math Myth”

   March 1 saw the publication of the book The Math Myth: And
   Other STEM Delusions, by Andrew Hacker. MAA members are likely
   to recognize the author’s name from an opinion piece he
   published in the New York Times in 2012, with the arresting
   headline "[7]Is Algebra Necessary?"
   Yes, I thought you’d remember it! It’s almost up there with
   John Lennon’s murder in terms of knowing where you were at the
   time you first heard of it. But just to be sure we are all on
   the same page, let me recap that, in that essay, Hacker, a
   retired college professor of political science who over the
   years had taught some non-majors math courses, laid out a case
   for dropping algebra as a required course in K-12 and college.
   Before I dive into Hacker’s new book, you would be advised to
   refresh your memory of the case he presented in that article,
   since his book is essentially an extension of what he said
   then, expanded to cover the entire Common Core Mathematical
   Standards. Prior to writing this review, I wrote an [8]article
   for the Huffington Post in which I summarized, with my
   commentary, his 2012 article, together with a [9]recent
   interview he gave to the Chronicle of Higher Education.
   In my article, I noted that Hacker has no idea what algebra
   really is. His focus is entirely on school algebra as it is
   very often taught, as a collection of rules for manipulating
   symbolic expressions. What his argument actually establishes,
   with sound arguments and good examples, are two conclusions I
   would agree with:
    1. Algebra as typically taught in the school system is
       presented as a meaningless game with arbitrary rules that
       does more harm than good.
    2. There are strong arguments for teaching algebra as it was
       originally developed and how professional mathematicians
       today view it.


   I’ll leave you to read my HuffPost piece for more of the gory
   details. For the benefit of lay readers who may come to this
   site, I should though repeat here the brief summary I gave in
   that article of the difference between algebra (as
   mathematicians understand and practice it) and the
   rule-based-manipulation-of-symbolic-expressions that so often
   passes for algebra in our schools.
   First codified by the Persian mathematician al-Khwarizmi in his
   book The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and
   Balancing (balancing = al-Jabr), written in Bhagdad around CE
   820, algebra is a powerful method for solving numerical
   problems more efficiently than by arithmetic. It does so by
   introducing two new ways of handling numerical problems.
   First, algebra provides methods for handling entire classes of
   numbers, rather than specific ones. (That’s where those x’s,
   y’s, and z’s come in, but that’s just an implementation detail
   introduced in France several centuries later.)
   Second, it provides a way to find numerical answers not by
   computing, which is often very difficult, but by reasoning
   logically to hone-in on the answer, using whatever information
   is available. Thus, whereas in arithmetic you work forwards,
   starting with numbers and computing with them to arrive at an
   answer, in algebra you work backwards, starting by postulating
   an answer and reasoning logically to figure out what it is.
   True, this powerful application of human logical reasoning
   capacity frequently gets boiled down to mastering various
   symbolic procedures to “Solve for x,” but again that’s just a
   particular implementation. Numerical forensics would be a
   sexier, and more descriptive, term for the real thing.
   The familiar symbolic expressions calculus usually taught in
   schools as “algebra” was a particular implementation of
   al-Khwarizmi’s ways of thinking introduced by the French
   mathematician François Viète in the 16th Century (700 years
   after algebra first began) to streamline paper-and-pencil
   problem solving. A more recent implementation of algebra is the
   computer spreadsheet.
   Since his new book follows the same line of attack as his 2012
   opinion piece, but with his sights widened from school algebra
   to the Common Core, instead of crafting another analytic essay,
   I will do what Hacker himself does, and list a number of
   examples to make my case. More precisely, I’ll select some of
   the 20 instances (in a book of just over 200 pages) where I
   found a claim that is either plain wrong, wildly misleading, or
   otherwise problematic, and ask where he went wrong. In marking
   20 pages, it’s likely I missed some. There were so many wild
   and inaccurate claims, I frequently found myself skimming
   through.
   First though, I should repeat what I said in my HuffPost
   article about his algebra piece. Just as his essay actually
   amounted to a strong argument in favor of teaching algebra to
   all students (albeit not the rule-based manipulations of
   formulas so often presented in place of algebra), so too his
   book includes a strong argument in favor of Common Core Math.
   In the same way that Hacker mischaracterized algebra in 2012,
   so too his portrayal of the CCSSM (Common Core State Standards
   for Mathematics) is totally at odds with the real thing—though
   not quite so far off if you turn your attention from the
   Standards themselves to some implementations of the CC.
   One of the book’s flaws is that Mr Hacker seems to get carried
   away with the flow of his rhetoric, since for the most part his
   argument consists of the erection of a series of straw men
   which he then, in time-honored tradition, proceeds to attack.
   “It’s a waste of time forcing kids to master azimuths and
   asymptotes,” he cries [not an exact quote] as early as page 2.
   I had to look up the word azimuth, since in my entire career as
   a mathematician and mathematics educator, I had never come
   across it. According to Wikipedia, azimuth is a “concept used
   in navigation, astronomy, engineering, mapping, mining and
   artillery.” I ran a search for the word on the entire, 93-page
   CCSSM document and, as I expected, it did not turn up. Straw
   man.
   Asymptotes are a different matter, of course, since a general
   sense of asymptotic behavior of functions is useful in many
   walks of life. The word is mentioned, but just once, in the
   CCSSM, in the section on Interpreting Functions (F-IF), where
   it says:
   Graph rational functions, identifying zeros and asymptotes when
   suitable factorizations are available, and showing end
   behavior.
   That’s it. One mention, buried towards the end of the document,
   in the section that says the student should:
       notation
       the context

   From the overall thrust of Hacker’s argument, I think it’s
   clear he believes this kind of knowledge is indeed important
   for everyone to have. But it’s also clear it is not a central
   pillar of the CC, to be used on page 2 to set the scene for
   what his book is about.
   Unfortunately, this example is indeed a good characterization
   of his overall argument: to knock down straw men.
   “We’re told that if our nation is to stay competitive, on a
   given morning all four million of our fifteen-year-olds will be
   studying azimuths and asymptotes,” he writes. (I am still on
   page 2, with over 200 more pages to go.) He provides no
   citation regarding who, exactly, is making this proclamation
   for the nation’s future. It’s not just disingenuously
   misleading, it’s about as far from reality as you could
   imagine, and not because of those azimuths. (See momentarily
   for the real story.)
   He continues, “Then, to graduate from high school, they will
   face tests on radical notations and elliptical equations.”
   To be sure, you will find mention of the word radical in the
   CCSSM, in the context of “Work with radicals and integer
   exponents” in the Section on Expressions and Equations (8.EE),
   which provides the helpful illustration,
   “For example, estimate the population of the United States as 3
   × 10^8 and the population of the world as 7 × 10^9, and
   determine that the world population is more than 20 times
   larger.”
   Again, this is exactly the kind of thing Hacker says (towards
   the end of his book) students should be able to do! And it is
   entirely reasonable that they be asked to demonstrate that
   ability on a test.
   “Elliptical equations” is another straw man.
   The point is, what Hacker keeps attacking are straw men. The
   CCSS is just what its name implies, a set of standards. It is
   not a curriculum, nor does it specify anything remotely like a
   daily, or even weekly timetable. How and when teachers across
   the land cover the various standards is for them, or perhaps
   their school district, to decide. As far as the CCSS are
   concerned, teachers can operate fluidly, depending on how their
   class progresses. (And no one will even suggest that they
   mention azimuths, let alone force the class to master them.)
   I would hazard a guess that Hacker has never looked at the CCSS
   document. Nor sat in on many math classes, as I have, and
   observed what actually goes on in today’s schools.
   Caveat: I get to see classes to which, for one reason or
   another, I have been invited to visit. Likely they are some of
   the best, since their teachers invite me along so their
   students can talk for a while with someone who has devoted a
   career to mathematical research. I hear enough stories to be
   prepared to believe things are often a lot worse. Perhaps even
   as bad as Hacker says. But his book is purported to be about
   educational policy, not what you can actually find in good or
   bad classrooms.
   Not only does Hacker give no indication he is familiar with the
   Common Core—the real one, not the azimuth-strewn, straw-man
   version he creates—he gives every indication he does not
   understand mathematics as it is practiced today. (He also does
   not know that pi is irrational, but I’ll come to that later.)
   Certainly, the examples he selects to illustrate the
   irrelevancy (in today’s world) of some of the test problems
   students are asked to solve simply demonstrate that he is
   lacking the basic, every-day, number sense he is arguing for.
   Let me give just three examples.
   On page 48, Hacker presents a question he took from an MCAT
   paper. It provides some technical data and asks what happens to
   the ratio of two inverse-square law forces between charges of
   given masses when the distance between them is halved. The
   context Hacker provides for this question is that medical
   professionals needs to be able to read and understand the
   mathematics used in technical papers. His claim is that this
   requirement does not extend to the physics of electrical and
   gravitational forces. In that, he is surely correct. But anyone
   with a grain of number sense will recognize at once that the
   setting is totally irrelevant. It’s a simple question about
   what happens to a ratio when the underlying scale is changed.
   The answer, of course, is nothing happens. It’s a ratio. The
   changes to the numerator and denominator cancel out. The ratio
   remains the same.
   What this question is asking for is, Do you understand what a
   ratio is? Surely that is something that any medical
   professional who will have to read and understand journal
   articles would need to know. Hacker completely misses this
   simple observation, and presents the question as an example of
   baroque mathematical testing run amok.
   On page 70, he presents a question from an admissions test for
   selective high schools. A player throws two dice and the same
   number comes up on both. The question asks the student to
   choose the probability that the two dice sum to 9 from the list
   0, 1/6, 2/9, 1/2, 1/3. Hacker’s problem is that the student is
   supposed to answer this in 90 seconds. Now, I share Hacker’s
   disdain for time-limited questions, but in this case the answer
   can only be 0. It’s not a probability question at all, and no
   computation is required. It just requires you to recognize that
   you can never get a sum of 9 when two dice show the same
   number. As with the MCAT question, the question is simply
   asking, Do you understand numbers? In this case, do you
   recognize that the sum of two equal numbers can never be odd.
   Finally, on page 101, Hacker presents a list of mathematics
   requirements high school students must meet in order to study
   at Harvard and similar universities. The list includes the
   names of various kinds of analytic functions. As usual, Hacker
   seems overwhelmed by the technical terms, or worries that the
   students will be, but all the list is asking for is that
   students can read graphs and charts and know what they
   represent in terms of growth and change. An essential skill,
   surely, for anyone in today’s information-rich world, not just
   students at elite universities.
   You get the pattern surely? Hacker’s problem is he is unable to
   see through the surface gloss of a problem and recognize that
   in many cases it is just asking the student if she or he has a
   very basic grasp of number, quantity, and relationships. Yet
   these are precisely the kinds of abilities he argues elsewhere
   in the book are crucial in today’s world. He is, I suspect, a
   victim of the very kind of math teaching he rightly decries—one
   that concentrates on learning rules and mastering formal
   manipulations, with little attention to understanding.
   This, surely, explains why he would write (page 96), “Reasoning
   mathematically may be a nice skill, but it is not relevant to
   most of life. We reason about many things: parenting, marriage,
   careers. Do we learn how to reason about these things by
   learning algebra?”
   If he had asked instead if we learn such reasoning in a typical
   school algebra class, I would agree with his implied answer of
   “No.” But algebra arose by codifying the everyday reasoning
   people carried out—and still carry out today—about the
   numerical or quantity aspects of any human activity that
   involves them. (Trade, commerce, and civil engineering were the
   original applications.)
   From that historical perspective, it is absolutely clear that
   learning algebra can help us master such reasoning. It helps by
   providing an opportunity to carry out that kind of reasoning
   free of the complexities a problem generally brings with it
   when it arises in a real world context.
   The tragedy of The Math Myth is that Hacker is actually arguing
   for exactly the kind of life-relevant mathematics education
   that I and many of my colleagues have been arguing for all our
   careers. (Our late colleague Lynn Steen comes to mind.)
   Unfortunately, and I suspect because Hacker himself did not
   have the benefit of a good math education, his understanding of
   mathematics is so far off base, he does not recognize that the
   examples he holds up as illustrations of bad education only
   seem so to him, because he misunderstands them.
   The real myth in The Math Myth is the portrayal of mathematics
   that forms the basis of his analysis. It’s the same myth you
   see propagated in Facebook posts from frustrated parents about
   Common Core math homework their children bring home from
   school.
   In the interests of their overall cardiovascular health, I have
   to recommend that math educators do not read The Math Myth. But
   if you do, perhaps you should start with the final chapter,
   titled “Numeracy 101.” Here, at least, you will find things you
   are likely to agree with, as he lays out what he believes would
   be a good quantitative literacy course for college students.
   But even there, where all seems warm and friendly and positive,
   you will be jolted by Hacker’s fundamental lack of knowledge of
   mathematics. He writes,
   “Along with phenomena like earthquakes and cyclones, nature
   also has some numbers that control or explain how the world
   works. One of them is pi, whose 3.14159 goes on indefinitely,
   at least as far as we know.”
   Yes, you read that last part correctly.
   “Few people writing today … can make more sense of numbers”
   proclaims the Wall Street Journal on the cover of Hacker’s
   book. Well, if that’s the view of the newspaper that purports
   to have the expertise to cover the nation’s financial markets,
   it is only a matter of time before we have another financial
   meltdown.
   Posted by [10]Mathematical Association of America at [11]10:11
   AM
   [12]Email This[13]BlogThis![14]Share to Twitter[15]Share to
   Facebook[16]Share to Pinterest
   Labels: [17]algebra, [18]Andrew Hacker, [19]Common Core, [20]Is
   algebra necessary, [21]mathematics education, [22]quantitative
   literacy



