Linear Algebra as an Introduction to Abstract Mathematics

   Isaiah Lankham, Bruno Nachtergaele, and Anne Schilling
   Publisher:
   World Scientific
   Publication Date:
   2016
   Number of Pages:
   198
   Format:
   Paperback
   Price:
   36.00
   ISBN:
   9789814723770
   Category:
   Textbook



   [Reviewed by
   Mark Hunacek
   , on
   09/5/2016
   ]

   Here at Iowa State University, we offer two separate and
   mutually exclusive introductory courses in linear algebra. One,
   at the sophomore level, is intended for people who are not
   mathematics majors; it emphasizes computation and applications.
   Majors take a junior-level course that focuses on proof. This
   book is a viable candidate as a text for the latter course, or
   any other course in which linear algebra is taught from a proof
   perspective, but the succinctness of the exposition may give an
   instructor pause.

   The book is quite a slim one (less than 200 pages of text,
   around 70 pages of which are appendices), focusing primarily on
   material that has now become fairly standard for an
   introductory course, although, as we’ll soon see, there are a
   few things found here that are not likely to be covered in many
   first courses. The text starts with an introduction (“What is
   Linear Algebra?”) that describes the subject by focusing on the
   solution of linear equations. The next chapter is a fairly
   complete introduction to complex numbers (defined as ordered
   pairs of real numbers) and their arithmetic. Somewhat
   surprisingly, the book even offers, in chapter 3, a proof of
   the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, assuming as known a
   preliminary result on attainment of extreme values on the
   closed unit disc. This, of course, is one of the “things found
   here that are not likely to be covered in many first courses”
   that I referred to at the beginning of this paragraph. I’m not
   sure that a first course in linear algebra is the time and
   place for a proof of the Fundamental Theorem, and if teaching
   our proof course from this book, I would almost certainly skip
   this; however, I am also loath to criticize a book for
   including too much interesting mathematics.

   After this preliminary material, the book gets down to linear
   algebra. There is a chapter on vector spaces (over the fields
   of real or complex numbers; arbitrary fields are not used),
   followed by one on linear independence and spanning sets,
   together with a proof that any finite-dimensional vector space
   has a basis. This is then followed by two chapters on linear
   transformations and eigenvalues/eigenvectors. The chapter on
   linear transformations discusses the matrix corresponding to a
   linear transformation relative to a given basis, but the issue
   of changing bases is deferred until later. Matrix arithmetic
   and its connections with systems of linear transformations, by
   the way, are not discussed in the body of the text itself, but
   in an appendix.

   Eigenvalues and eigenvectors are defined for transformations,
   with connections to matrices discussed. In particular, it is
   proved that any linear operator on a complex finite-dimensional
   vector space can be put into upper triangular form. Because
   determinants have not yet been introduced, the characteristic
   polynomial is not, at this point, defined, but an early preview
   of the concept is given for 2 x 2 matrices.

   The authors prove the existence of eigenvalues for operators on
   complex vector spaces by a determinant-free argument that is
   used in Axler’s [309]Linear Algebra Done Right, but the book
   does not seem to be as stridently anti-determinant as is
   Axler’s text; determinants are not deferred until the very end
   of the book, as is the case with Linear Algebra Done Right, but
   are instead discussed in the very next chapter. It is in this
   chapter that the characteristic polynomial is defined; it is
   mentioned that the roots of this polynomial are the eigenvalues
   of the matrix, but no specific computations are given.


   Inner product spaces are discussed in the next chapter. All the
   usual material is covered here, including orthogonal projection
   and (quite briefly) its application to minimization problems.
   However, the phrase “method of least squares” is not used.

   Next, there is a very brief chapter on how the matrix of a
   linear transformation changes with regard to a change in basis.
   Then, in chapter 11, the text returns to inner product spaces,
   discussing operators on them. Self-adjoint and normal operators
   are defined, and a version of the spectral theorem for normal
   operators (that an operator is normal if and only if it is
   represented by a diagonal matrix with respect to an orthonormal
   basis) is established. The chapter ends with a very brief look
   at positive operators, the polar decomposition, and the
   singular value decomposition. This entire chapter is only about
   ten pages long, so clearly none of these ideas can be developed
   in depth, but that can hardly be expected in a text for a first
   course in linear algebra, most of which don’t discuss this
   material at all.

   There are four appendices. The first is a set of supplementary
   notes on matrices and their applications to linear systems; the
   second discusses the basic terminology of sets and functions;
   the third introduces some basic algebraic terminology; the
   fourth lists some common mathematical symbolism and, in an
   unusual but very much appreciated feature, provides historical
   commentary as well. Readers who want to know, for example, the
   origins of the equal sign, or the symbol \(\infty\) for
   infinity, will find answers here.

   Although the approach taken in this book is proof-oriented,
   this is not a text on advanced linear algebra. As the above
   summary of the book’s contents should indicate, the topics
   covered here are typically those of an introductory course, and
   standard second-semester topics such as the minimal polynomial,
   canonical forms, Cayley-Hamilton theorem, etc. are not
   discussed.

   The book is written so that it should be understandable by
   anybody who has taken a semester or two of calculus (and even
   that prerequisite is not strictly necessary, since the only
   time calculus is actually used is in some examples). However,
   the exposition is fairly succinct, and some prior exposure to
   proofs would likely be very valuable. The book states in the
   preface that that elusive and ill-defined concept,
   “mathematical maturity”, is the real prerequisite for the book.

   And that observation leads me to what I think is the one real
   difficulty I have with the text. Since “mathematical maturity”
   means different things to different people, the book would have
   benefited, I think, from some discussion of basic logic and
   proof techniques, if only to explain to the students, for
   example, how to negate a simple mathematical sentence, and what
   the converse and contrapositive of a statement is. This seems
   particularly appropriate for any book that refers to itself as
   an “introduction to abstract mathematics”, and, given that the
   book is certainly not unduly long, a 15 or 20 page discussion
   along these lines could easily have been accommodated, perhaps
   as another appendix.

   Other mild quibbles: there is no bibliography at all in the
   text, and it probably wouldn’t have hurt to spend more time
   with detailed discussion of examples. In particular, I would
   like to have seen examples of infinite-dimensional spaces,
   combined with some indication of how one proves that a vector
   space is not finite-dimensional.

   It should be noted that, at least as of this writing, a free
   PDF copy of the book can be obtained [310]at one of the
   authors’ webpages. The page numbers between the PDF and the
   printed text don’t match up exactly, there are more appendices
   in the PDF copy, and a couple of figures that are shaded in the
   text are in color in the PDF. Other than these very minor
   differences, the PDF appears nearly identical to the hard copy.


   To summarize and conclude: this is a well-written book, but the
   succinctness of exposition and failure to discuss proof
   techniques would likely lead me to find a different text for
   Iowa State’s proof-based linear algebra course. However, this
   book might fare better as a potential text for an honors course
   in linear algebra.
     __________________________________________________________

   Mark Hunacek ([311]mhunacek@iastate.edu) teaches mathematics at
   Iowa State University.

