Consumers Are Feeling Better About The Economy Than Polls Suggest

   By [15]Tim Mullaney


   Filed under [16]Economic Confidence





   Bill Fox sells cars, including all-American Chevrolets and Ram
   trucks, in an upstate New York town [20]whose congressman lost
   re-election in 2014 by 20 points — the kind of place where,
   according to the [21]usual media narrative, voters are angry
   about the loss of blue-collar jobs and worried about the
   economy. But [22]like other car dealers, Fox is seeing
   near-record sales: Somehow, he said, consumers don’t seem as
   worried about the economy as the pundits say they are.


   “We’re not seeing [anger] at all,” said Fox, a partner in
   Auburn-based Fox Dealerships. “The way I account for it is, the
   public sees economic indicators that are OK, their job’s not
   threatened, and they may be afraid of the future, but the
   monthly [car] payment is good.”

   That kind of optimism might be surprising in a year when Donald
   Trump, at least according to one [23]dominant media narrative,
   [24]rode a wave of economic anxiety to the Republican
   presidential nomination and when voters routinely [25]cite the
   economy as a [26]top concern. In a recent [27]NBC News/Wall
   Street Journal poll, for example, 48 percent of voters said the
   country is “losing ground” on economic issues, compared with 45
   percent who said it is “making progress.”[28]^1 In a [29]recent
   YouGov poll, 40 percent of respondents said the economy was
   getting worse, versus 21 percent who said it was getting
   better. A [30]weekly Gallup survey that asked the same question
   found that 37 percent think the economy is getting better and
   58 percent think it is getting worse. (Gallup’s survey, unlike
   YouGov’s, didn’t offer “about the same” as an option.)
   Seventy-two percent of voters say the U.S. is on the wrong
   track, according to a [31]separate poll from Gallup, which
   hasn’t found a majority satisfied with the “way things are
   going in the United States” since George W. Bush’s first term.


   Yet even as Americans tell political pollsters that they are
   worried about the economy, they tell a different story in a
   separate set of surveys that are used by economists and
   investors to forecast consumer spending behavior. On Tuesday,
   the Conference Board’s [32]Consumer Confidence Index, hit a
   [33]nine-year high. The index is still well below its all-time
   high, set in 2000, but is as good as during Ronald Reagan’s
   “Morning in America” era of the mid-1980s. A [34]rival survey
   from the University of Michigan finds consumers a bit less
   cheery but is still consistent with a solid economy. (On the
   other hand, the less well-known Bloomberg Consumer Comfort
   Index has [35]fallen sharply in September, although it is still
   [36]up significantly over the past few years.) Even people with
   only a high-school education — whose economic woes are often
   cited in media reports explaining Trump’s rise — are about as
   confident today as they were before the recession began,
   [37]according to the Michigan survey.


   “After a little bit of softening in the spring, [confidence]
   picked up,” said Lynn Franco, the Conference Board’s director
   of economic indicators and surveys.

   Which set of surveys should we believe? Political and economic
   surveys serve different purposes. Political polls seek to
   predict or explain voter behavior; confidence surveys are used
   by economists and investors looking for an early hint about how
   consumers will behave in the months ahead. But there is
   evidence that confidence surveys like the Conference Board’s
   and Michigan’s yield a more accurate reflection of the state of
   the economy.

   A one-point increase in the Conference Board index, for
   example, is typically followed by an $8.3 billion increase in
   consumer spending over the next 16 months, according to a 2015
   report by Moody’s Analytics. It found that consumer confidence
   swings predict about two-thirds of all movement in consumer
   spending, which is 70 percent of the economy. That pattern
   seems to have persisted this year, when consumer spending grew
   at a 4.4 percent annual pace in the second quarter as
   confidence rebounded from dips in late 2015 and early this
   year. Political surveys don’t have the same track record: For
   example, [38]Pew Research Center’s version of the wrong-track
   question, which is similar to Gallup’s, does a poor job
   predicting major economic variables such as consumer spending
   or job growth.[39]^2


   The confidence surveys, especially Michigan’s, have been honed
   over the years to improve their predictive accuracy. Michigan
   has been conducting its phone survey for 70 years, and its
   dozens of questions zero in on consumers’ specific financial
   circumstances as well as their broad view of the economy.
   Questions that researchers thought would have predictive power
   but did not have been weeded out, said Richard Curtin, the
   longtime director of the Michigan survey.

   This year, confidence is probably high because wages are rising
   and inflation is low, partly a result of the [40]nearly 40
   percent drop in the price of gasoline since it neared $3.80 a
   gallon in 2014. “We measure economic factors by sticking close
   to what people’s actual experience is,” Curtin said.


   The consumer confidence data is consistent with other measures
   that show the economy performing [41]solidly but not
   spectacularly. (Consumer spending has held up better recently
   than other parts of the economy, such as manufacturing.) So why
   do voter-consumers pull the long faces when pollsters ask the
   right-track question? Former Federal Reserve Chairman Ben
   Bernanke [42]recently argued that the election-oriented surveys
   may be skewed by political polarization and that the
   non-political surveys capture a truer picture of Americans’
   economic outlook.


   “When Americans are asked specifically about the economy, in an
   apolitical context, they are for the most part not nearly as
   pessimistic as the conventional wisdom would have it,” Bernanke
   [43]wrote in a blog post for the Brookings Institution earlier
   this year. “Instead, they answer more or less as they have done
   in the past at a similar stage of the business cycle.”


   It’s possible that Americans interpret similar questions
   differently in a nonpolitical and political context. Economic
   surveys more so than political ones are focused on short-term
   behavior. Someone with a good job but little saved for
   retirement might be positive about his immediate financial
   well-being and therefore report relatively high near-term
   confidence. But that same person might be [44]nervous about his
   longer-term outlook and want political leaders to address these
   issues. That’s consistent with consumer confidence surveys,
   too: Both Michigan’s and the Conference Board’s show more
   confidence about current conditions than the future.


   As far as markets are concerned, though, there’s no question
   which set of surveys is better. Investors get paid for being
   right, not for choosing the right ideological team; they long
   ago learned to pay attention to the confidence data, not
   political polls or accompanying noise, to understand consumer
   moods that affect behavior in the ways that count.


