Quantized

     A [13]monthly column in which top researchers explore the
     process of discovery. This month’s columnist, Ingrid
     Daubechies, is the James B. Duke Professor of Mathematics
     and Electrical and Computer Engineering at Duke University.


   There’s no single starting point for the story, as mathematical
   image analysis has been in use for years, and in many guises.
   But a key event was the restoration of another masterpiece, and
   the settling of a question that had divided art historians for
   decades.

   In the 15th century the brothers Hubert and Jan van Eyck
   created the [14]Ghent Altarpiece, a grand work of art that
   consists of 12 panels, eight of them connected by hinged
   shutters. When the polyptich is closed, the far right panel at
   middle height shows an Annunciation scene; in the background,
   propped up on a stand, is the page of a book with medieval
   writing. It was not clear, however, whether the van Eycks had
   painted only a book’s symbolic representation or its actual
   text. If the latter, then art historians wanted to identify
   that text.


   The portion of the painting in question is covered with fine
   cracks in shades of brown, very similar to the paint used for
   the letters themselves, with many cracks slanted in directions
   similar to the strokes of the letters. These cracks impeded the
   reading of the putative text, even by experts in deciphering
   manuscripts in the hard-to-read medieval writing.

   In 2010, art conservators began an extensive restoration
   campaign of the Ghent Altarpiece. As part of this project, the
   panels [15]were photographed with exquisitely high precision.
   Here was the chance to decipher the putative text of the
   polyptich. My colleagues and I were asked by the art historian
   Maximiliaan Martens whether we could, with such high-resolution
   scans, bring mathematics to bear on the problem.


   Our work consisted of two main steps: finding a way to
   automatically detect the numerous cracks, and then in-painting
   (or eliminating) them. The latter was handled with
   state-of-the-art methods developed by others. But detecting the
   cracks turned out to be a harder nut to crack. In the end, we
   had to rely on X-ray images of the panels, in which the cracks
   stood out the best, and a combination of several filtering
   methods, each adapted to the data.

   After in-painting the cracks, the resulting would-be text
   looked as undecipherable to us as before. But not to
   paleographers. They identified 12 word groups that made it
   clear that the van Eycks had painted an actual text. To the
   delight of the art historians, they identified it as a
   theological text written by Thomas Aquinas on the Annunciation
   and copied by scribes in Flanders at the start of the 14th
   century.

   The experience we gained on this project would prove critical
   for the Ghissi Reunification project. In preparing for the
   exhibition, Dutch artist and art reconstruction expert
   [16]Charlotte Caspers was commissioned to paint a replacement
   for the lost panel. Together with NCMA curator David Steel, she
   designed a composition in Ghissi’s style; the subject of the
   scene was determined from the Golden Legend, a medieval
   bestseller chronicling lives of saints and the source material
   for the first seven small panels.


   When the replacement panel was ready, it vividly demonstrated
   how bright and sparkling the altarpiece must have been when it
   was new. But it also became apparent that the Caspers panel
   could not simply be displayed next to the other eight panels in
   the same frame. It would distract the viewer too much from the
   aged and discolored originals, though they were authentic in a
   way the new panel was not.

   Mathematical analysis allowed us to help. After studying the
   old panels as well as the new, we made a high-resolution
   digital version of the new panel in which the gold looked
   duller and the colors more subdued to mimic 650 years of aging
   pigment. We also added a believable crack pattern. In short, we
   virtually aged the panel. A printout of this aged version now
   completes the St. John Altarpiece.

   The same technical analysis can also be applied in the reverse
   direction: After fine-tuning the digital image manipulations to
   make the transition from new to old, we also wanted to take
   high-resolution images of the existing panels and map their
   old, aged colors to corresponding “freshly painted” versions,
   thus rejuvenating the 14th-century work. Importantly, we also
   needed to detect and in-paint the cracks, something we had
   learned how to do with the Ghent Altarpiece.

   In the Ghent crack-removal work, X-ray images of the altarpiece
   had proven essential, so we asked the NCMA conservators for
   X-ray photos of the St. John Altarpiece panels. The most
   dominant feature in each of these X-ray photographs was an
   annoying overlaid lattice structure. This, it turned out, was
   due to cradling, a fairly standard conservation practice in the
   19th and early 20th centuries. To reduce warping, conservators
   planed the thickness of the wood-panel support of old European
   paintings, down to one centimeter or even less. To the back of
   the resulting, thinner board, they then attached a hardwood
   lattice or cradle. This lattice consisted of fixed members in
   the direction of the wood grain of the board and sliding
   members perpendicular to the wood grain that tunneled through
   the fixed members.

   Cradling did not hold up over time. In extreme cases, wood
   panels have reacted to the stress constraints of cradling by
   developing such large cracks that specialists are called in to
   carefully remove the cradle and replace it with a less rigid
   support structure that allows the panel its natural warping
   freedom. It’s a very tricky and expensive process.

   To the annoyance of conservators, the cradle lattice structure
   hides from view the painting and conservation repair details
   that one usually tries to glean from X-ray pictures. When we
   wondered whether mathematical analysis and image processing
   could possibly help in removing these artifacts virtually, our
   tentative suggestions were met with fervent enthusiasm, and art
   conservators in several different museums volunteered a variety
   of data for us to try out our ideas. Especially helpful were
   rare instances of X-ray images of the same painting with and
   without cradling, crucially important for verifying our
   computational results. [17]Rujie (Rachel) Yin, a graduate
   student in mathematics at Duke University, led the work.


   This project turned out to be our biggest challenge yet. One
   complication is that wood grain varies a lot, even within one
   piece of wood. This makes it hard to identify a wood grain
   texture reliably when other fine-grained and elongated textures
   are present as well — as is likely in an X-ray of a painting
   that reveals brushstroke patterns that the conservators want to
   distinguish better. The aim of removing only cradle wood grain
   makes the task extra challenging, since that wood grain is
   never observed in isolation. The cradled regions contain the
   wood grain of both panel and cradle, while cradle-free regions
   contain wood grain from only the panel. (Sadly, identifying
   this grain pattern isn’t much help, since the panel’s grain
   will be different, just a few centimeters over.)

   We turned to machine-learning algorithms to separate the
   features into those more likely to pertain to the panel and
   others more likely from the cradle. The algorithm that we
   developed achieves good results when the cradle and panel
   wood-grain textures are reasonably different. Unfortunately in
   the Ghent Altarpiece, the same wood — Flemish oak — was used
   for both the panel and the cradle, and the algorithm has some
   trouble parsing the grain. In addition, the algorithm is quite
   slow.

   Fortunately, the target users are among the most patient people
   on the planet: Art conservators typically don’t bat an eyelid
   at having to clean paintings with Q-tips and distilled water,
   so having to let an algorithm run for a few hours is perfectly
   acceptable to them. Yin’s proof-of-concept code has since been
   transformed into a more robust version, with an interface that
   can be used by art conservators; the [18]open-source software
   can be freely downloaded.


   In the new exhibition, both new and old versions of the
   altarpiece are shown on a large video screen, alongside short
   documentaries featuring the image processing and a (very
   impressionistic) explanation of the mathematics that went into
   the rejuvenation and “aging” processes.

   We are now working on other problems. For instance, in those
   rare cases in the 19th century when a wood panel, painted on
   both sides, was not split, so that both sides could be
   displayed simultaneously, the X-ray image of the panel shows
   all the typical details that stand out more than they do in a
   visible-light picture — but for both sides, mixed. Can one
   split this into two virtual X-ray images, using as side
   information the two visible-light pictures? This is again a
   challenging problem, and we have preliminary results, but hope
   to become better at it. Other problems await as well.

   So far, our work with art historians and art conservators has
   provided interesting mathematical problems that have already
   led us far beyond a simple application of off-the-shelf tools.
   We have not yet had to build new mathematical theory, but I
   expect it is just a matter of time; I would be willing to stake
   a serious bet that it will happen in the next 10 years. And I
   also bet that 10 years ago, none of our collaborators from the
   art world would have predicted the value of mathematics in
   their own work.

   They have discovered what we always knew — that math is
   everywhere.

   This article was reprinted on [19]Wired.com.


   Save

   Save

   Save

   Save

   Save


