[247]NPR Ed


[248]How The U.S. Is Neglecting Its Smartest Kids


   According to the report:
       percent and 45 percent of Wisconsin students scored at or
       above the next grade level in the spring of their current
       grade." For example, 38 percent of third-graders already
       knew enough fourth-grade math to pass.

       scored at or above the next grade level in the spring of
       their current grade level." For example, 34 percent of
       eighth-graders would have passed ninth-grade math.

       scored at or above the next grade level in the spring of
       their current grade levels." For example, 42 percent of
       seventh-graders would have passed eighth-grade reading.

   That Florida figure isn't news to Lynda Hayes, director of the
   P.K. Yonge Developmental Research School in Gainesville, Fla.
   The public school serves as a lab school for the University of
   Florida and accepts students by lottery from 31 Florida cities.

   "I think aiming for grade-level achievement for all students is
   still an important goal for K-12 schools — but not to the
   detriment of growth and achievement for all students, including
   those that are achieving at the highest levels," Hayes says.
   "We have had extended conversations at our school about
   enriching and deepening learning rather than simply
   accelerating students through grade-level courses."

   Ultimately, this meant big changes. In the past few years, P.K.
   Yonge has opened a new, designed-from-scratch physical space
   that allows for clustering teachers in large teams to give them
   extra time for collaboration, training and prep.

   Today, the elementary school has three multi-age groups, each
   with 108-132 students and seven teachers: K-first grade,
   second-third grade and fourth-fifth grade. Students are grouped
   by ability and subject in ways that change throughout the year.
   In rare cases, they may be placed with other students who are
   two or more years older.

   Andrew Ho says this report from Makel and his colleagues isn't
   nearly as surprising as it might seem. Ho is a student
   measurement expert at the Harvard Graduate School of Education
   and has a word for the findings: "obviousness." He points out
   that large numbers of students will score both above and below
   the cutoff of a standardized test.

   It's also important to note that a score on a single test is
   not synonymous with being ready to achieve at a given grade
   level — academically, socially or emotionally. And the
   effective distance between grade levels is smaller in middle
   and high school than it is in elementary school.

   However, for Makel the key question remains: If there are so
   many overachievers, why isn't more being done nationally to
   make sure they are being challenged appropriately, regardless
   of age?

   A large, [249]national survey of districts from 2013 showed
   that two-thirds of middle schools offered acceleration by
   subject. Just under half offered acceleration by grade, but
   it's unclear how many students took advantage of those
   programs. Four out of five districts reported that state laws
   did not define "gifted and talented."


   "There may be schools that do respond to these scores, and many
   students may be getting subject-specific or whole-grade
   acceleration. But there's no national policy, and many states
   and schools don't have policies on it either," says Makel.

   Hayes compares traditional school design — both the physical
   spaces and systems — to an egg crate. She says, as long as
   teachers are forced to work in isolation with limited time for
   teamwork, professional development and lesson preparation,
   "achieving what is possible in response to learner variability
   will be impossible."

   Further complicating matters, Hayes says, are the many
   bureaucratic rules and traditions enforced at the school,
   district and state level, including teacher evaluations based
   on student test scores, extensive federal reporting
   requirements, and curricula that "tell teachers what to teach
   and when and for how long no matter who the students are in
   front of them."

   Dallas Dance, the superintendent of Baltimore County Public
   Schools, struggles with these forces on a districtwide scale.
   This fall, he proposed a policy change to how his schools
   handle [250]gifted and talented students.


   Previously, students had to be nominated for testing by a
   teacher or parent and were selected in third and fifth grades
   only. Now, Baltimore County will move to a universal screening
   process. And, rather than limit enrichment and acceleration to
   a predetermined group, Dance wants to allow for more flexible
   grouping, so that a student who needs "advanced academics" in
   just one subject or for a period of time can get it.

   "We want to make sure that, in every area, we can extend,
   accelerate or enrich on an ongoing basis," Dance says. He
   agrees with the Johns Hopkins findings that there are large
   numbers of undiscovered overachievers who could benefit from
   these resources. The change in policy, though, has proved
   controversial, Dance says, and it's currently under review by
   the district's board of education.




    [254] javascript:void(0);


