National Museum of Mathematics (MoMath) Launches "Significant
Figures," New Math Series for Seniors Designed to Keep the Mind
Active and Alert

Share Article


New MoMath Program to Keep Seniors' Mind Agile

   News Image

     “By expanding our programs with engaging math content
     directed at seniors, we can help keep their minds agile,
     sharp, and fresh, building upon our mission to make math
     exciting, fun, and accessible to young and old alike."

   New York, NY (PRWEB) August 18, 2016

   Free Admission for Grandparents who Bring a Grandchild Along

   In Celebration of National Grandparents Day
   During The Weekend of Saturday, September 10th & Sunday,
   September 11th

   The National Museum of Mathematics, (MoMath), the only museum
   in North America dedicated to math, has announced a new
   initiative to bring math – and all its wonders – to older
   adults. First, MoMath celebrates the special relationship of
   grandparent to grandchild in recognition of Grandparents’
   Weekend – Saturday, September 10 and Sunday, September 11th.
   During this special weekend, any grandparent who brings a
   grandchild to the Museum is welcome to attend the Museum free
   of charge; each grandparent can bring up to two grandchildren
   free of charge.

   Visitors to the museum during Grandparent Weekend are also
   welcome to attend a sneak preview of Significant Figures – a
   new series designed to engage the mind with creative and
   entertaining mathematical activities. Led by MoMath’s education
   staff, this unique weekend session is aimed at seniors and can
   be enjoyed together with grandchildren. Sessions will be held
   at 11:30 am and 2 pm on both Saturday and Sunday; advance
   registration is required; $8/person session fee. Space is
   limited. Registrants will be accepted on a first-come,
   first-served basis. For more information, please visit
   grandparents.momath.org.

   Grandparents Weekend is followed by the debut of Significant
   Figures, a series of weekly educator-led workshops offered to
   seniors on Wednesday afternoons from September 2016 through
   December 2016. Significant Figures will include different
   puzzle activities, word play, and state-of-the art interactive
   exhibits to stimulate brains, minds, and in some cases, even
   the bodies of older adults. Workshops are held from 3:45 to
   4:45 pm each Wednesday. On the first Wednesday of each month,
   full-session registrants are invited to enjoy reserved priority
   seating for the series, Math Encounters with a special
   opportunity to meet the presenter just before the program
   begins.

   Kicking off Significant Figures on Wednesday, September 14 at
   3:45 pm will be special guest, Will Shortz, New York Times
   crossword puzzle editor. For more information, see
   significantfigures.momath.org.

   “Since the launch of the Museum almost four years ago, we have
   been thrilled with the overwhelmingly positive response we’ve
   received from students, teachers, kids, and families.” stated
   Cindy Lawrence, Executive Director and CEO of MoMath. “By
   expanding our programs with engaging math content directed at
   seniors, we can help keep their minds agile, sharp, and fresh,
   building upon our mission to make math exciting, fun, and
   accessible to young and old alike. Each week we will present
   new and innovative ways for the older adult population to not
   only experience the wonders of math, but to also take part in
   mental health exercises for their brains.”

   About the National Museum of Mathematics
   The National Museum of Mathematics (MoMath) strives to enhance
   public understanding and perception of mathematics in daily
   life. Since it opened in December 2012, more than 500,000 New
   Yorkers and visitors from around the world have come to the
   Museum. Another 500,000 have experienced MoMath exhibitions and
   content in seven countries, including the United States,
   Singapore, Brazil, Germany, Russia, Spain, and Sweden.

   The only math museum in North America, MoMath fulfills an
   incredible demand for hands-on math programming, creating a
   space where those who are math-challenged – as well as math
   enthusiasts of all backgrounds and levels of understanding –
   can revel in their own personal realm of the infinite world of
   mathematics through more than 37 state-of-the-art interactive
   exhibits. MoMath was awarded the bronze 2013 MUSE Award for
   Education and Outreach by the American Alliance of Museums.

   Location:
   MoMath is located at 11 E. 26th on the north side of popular
   Madison Square Park in Manhattan.

   Hours:
   Open seven days a week, 10 a.m.-5 p.m. For more information,
   visit momath.org.

   Share article on social media or email:

   View article via:
   [41]Pdf [42]Print



