Minority Groups Lose When They Collaborate with Power

   Posted By Kiki Sanford on Feb 06, 2017


      mailto:?subject=Nautilus: Minority Groups Lose When They Collaborate with Power&body=I saw this blog post on Nautil.us and wanted to share it with you.






   Photograph by National Eye Institute / Flickr

   Cailin O’Connor—a philosopher, scientist, and mathematician—may
   not enjoy tense situations, but they fascinate her. Last year,
   in a Huffington Post article [65]titled “Game Theory and The
   Walking Dead,” she wrote that the zombie show’s “plot lines are
   rich with strategic tension.” She goes on to analyze three of
   what she calls “the most strategically compelling scenes,” and
   seems to relish in the fact that the characters—since they so
   often die—aren’t great game theorists. (Game theory, as she
   sometimes has to remind her students at the University of
   California, Irvine, isn’t really about games, but about
   predicting rational behavior.)


   Recently, she’s brought this sort of scrutiny on the behavior
   of her fellow academics. In a recent paper, she analyzes how
   they strategically cooperate and bargain at a time when, in
   most scientific fields, published work is [66]most often
   co-authored, and how power discrepancies can affect these
   collaborations—between grad students and professors, say, or
   between men and women, or between whites and people of color
   (or, indeed, combinations of these).


   In the paper, co-authored with Justin Bruner, a philosopher and
   evolutionary game theorist at Australian National University,
   she [67]writes, “Our results should help provide fodder for
   what ought to be an ongoing discussion in academia—how to
   ensure fairness in collaborative work.”
   [68][12139_c5c548e462f63499be7e59ff9f3d8e40.png]


     There might be social dynamical pressures that mean inequity
     pops up again, and again, and again.

   In a conversation with Nautilus, [69]O’Connor discussed her
   game theory models and how they shed light on the intricacies
   of academic power structures, how inequity arises, and how we
   can combat it.


   Do inequity game theory models play out in the real world?

   The answer is maybe. They at least tell us it’s really easy for
   inequity to emerge between social groups. It takes almost
   nothing in a model to get inequity. You just have to divide
   people into social groups and then put them in a situation
   where they’re bargaining, or they’re trying to coordinate with
   each other. It just kind of emerges on its own as they learn to
   interact.

   This isn’t to say that things like discrimination, and bias,
   and implicit bias, and stereotype-threat don’t matter to
   inequity. I don’t mean to imply that, but the models tell us
   that we don’t need them to get it. Part of what might be going
   on in the real world is just that these processes, where people
   learn to do the things that work best for them, can lead to
   inequitable norms on their own without people having to even
   have a bias.

   What do the inequity models tell us?

   What they tell us is that inequity is not necessarily going to
   be a problem that we can solve and then it stays solved. But,
   rather, it’s something where there might be social dynamical
   pressures that mean inequity pops up again, and again, and
   again. You can’t think of it as something that we’re just going
   to fix and then be done with. Rather, if we want to solve
   problems related to inequity and discrimination, we should be
   thinking of it as something we’re going to constantly have to
   deal with as a society. Just always having to fight against it.

   Where do you think we can, and maybe should, implement change
   to put the brakes on the process?

   One way we could stop it would be to stop recognizing people as
   being members of different social groups. If we could get rid
   of that, this process wouldn’t occur. That is a necessary
   precondition to get the kind of inequity I’m talking about.
   It’s maybe kind of hopeless to hope that humans would just stop
   believing in social categories. If we could, that would stop
   it.

   In academia, with power hierarchies, you’re always going to
   have professors and grad students. That’s not really something
   you can get rid of. Of course, it’s not like we can just erase
   biological sex and the biological components of race either,
   but we do know that some societies recognize those as less
   important to interactions than others do. I argue in my papers
   that one of the best ways to deal with any particular instance
   of inequity or discrimination is with explicit social rules
   that just stop inequity from mattering.

     Women are more likely to collaborate with other women.

   What have you found about how academics interact and bargain?

   There’s this really interesting phenomenon in these models
   where you have social groups learning to bargain. I’ve been
   calling it the [70]“cultural Red King effect.” If one of the
   groups is smaller than the other group—say women make up 10
   percent of a community and men make up 90 percent—this would be
   like a business or an academic discipline.


   The smaller group, under a lot of situations is more likely to
   end up getting less when they bargain. As the group develops
   rules for bargaining, it’s more likely they end up at a rule
   where the minority group gets less. The reason for this is that
   when the minority group is interacting, they’re meeting
   majority group members all the time because there are a lot of
   people in the majority. Majority members tend not to meet the
   minority group because the minority is very rare.

   As a result, the minority group learns how to interact with the
   majority more quickly. In a bargaining situation, this often
   means that they learn to be accommodating. Once the minority
   group learns to accommodate, the majority group can then take
   advantage of that.

   One of my papers argues that could be happening in academia as
   well. Maybe it helps explain why you see some minority groups
   getting less, like women and possibly people of color. If
   they’re getting less, maybe they then learn not to collaborate
   or just to collaborate with people of their own type so that
   they don’t get taken advantage of.

   Why are you looking at bargaining and power within academia?

   Part of my interest in using these models to look at academia
   came from empirical results. Carl Bergstrom—he’s a biologist
   but who does a lot of social science work as well—and others
   have a [71]paper, “The Role of Gender in Scholarly Authorship,”
   where they looked across academic collaboration and showed that
   in a lot of disciplines women tend not to have the most
   prestigious author positions. They tend not to be first and
   last author, which requires some explaining.


   There’s another set of empirical results showing that in a
   number of disciplines, women and sometimes people of color tend
   to collaborate less often, are less likely to be on
   collaborative papers, and when they do collaborate, are more
   likely to collaborate with their in-group. Women are more
   likely to collaborate with other women.

   Part of the question I wanted to ask is, “Is there some norm
   developing where women are getting less and less credit, or
   possibly doing more work on academic papers, and is that maybe
   dis-incentivizing them from collaborating?”

   Why are collaborations useful in studying power dynamics?

   Collaboration has been spreading in almost every academic
   discipline. In the sciences it’s now almost unheard of to see a
   single author on a paper, where just one academic works on it.
   You almost always have more than one. What this means is that
   you have a situation where a group of people are getting
   together to do something they couldn’t do on their own. They’re
   creating a good together. A resource. Whenever people do that
   they also have to bargain. They have to decide: “Once we’ve
   created this thing, who’s going to get what? Who’s going to get
   all the credit for it? Who’s going to get the fancy job or
   tenure, or the things that come out of doing joint work?”

   One paper I’ve written looks at what happens when you have
   different social groups in academia: If you have men and women,
   or black and white academics, and they’re involved in
   collaborative projects. How do they divide the resources, and
   the work, and the credit in that collaborative project?

   One of the other papers I’ve written is about how academics
   across the hierarchies in academia learn to interact with each
   other. The assumption is that people higher on the academic
   hierarchy have more power than people lower on the academic
   hierarchy. That’s going to influence how they come to bargain
   with each other, and how they’re going to divide resources and
   credit they get for joint projects in academia—for
   collaborative papers, for co-authorship, or research projects
   they do together.

   How does power play into the scenarios?

   In our paper, “Power, Bargaining, and Collaboration,” we looked
   at what power does to the emergence of bargaining between
   groups. We found that when one group has more power than the
   other, they’re more likely to get more resources when they
   bargain. One thing this tells us is that if you have two social
   groups interacting, and one has a little bit more power, then
   they’re going to potentially get more resources as norms of
   bargaining emerge. They’re going to have more resources then.

   In our model, resources translate directly into power again. In
   a new scenario, as norms of bargaining emerge, they’re going to
   get more and more resources. It’s not just that inequity
   emerges easily, it’s that once it’s there, it’s
   self-perpetuating. You see social dynamical factors kind of
   pushing to more and more inequity. That’s another aspect of
   this. We can’t just fix it, and then it’s over. But, rather,
   whenever we have social groups, inequity emerges, and then it
   can perpetuate itself and get worse.

   Dr. Kiki Sanford holds a Ph.D. in Molecular, Cellular and
   Integrative Physiology from U.C. Davis, and is a specialist in
   learning and memory. She is also the founder and host of the
   radio show [72]This Week in Science.
   Get the Nautilus newsletter


   The newest and most popular articles delivered right to your
   inbox!
   ____________________
   ____________________
   Subscribe

   ____________________

   WATCH: The president of Olin College, Richard K. Miller, on why
   the institution doesn’t grant tenure.

   [594159164_640.jpg]

   The lead image is courtesy of [73]National Eye Institute via
   Flickr.
   Minority Groups Lose When They Collaborate with Power



