Sony develops algorithm based AI music

   By Michaela Cabrera

   A future chart-topping song may soon come from an algorithm.

   Sony Computer Science Laboratory (CSL) in Paris is developing a
   system of algorithms which can create songs that cater to the
   user's taste, based on styles adapted from existing music.

   The starting point of the song creation is a database of sheet
   music of more than 13,000 existing songs, from which the user
   can choose any number of titles with a sound or feel they would
   like the new song to incorporate.

   The algorithm analyses the songs' characteristics, and
   statistical properties related to rhythm, pitch and harmony. It
   will learn, for instance, which notes "go well" with a given
   chord, what chord is probable after a given chord, or which
   notes usually follow after a given note.

   From the emerging pattern, the algorithm creates a partition or
   lead sheet with similar characteristics.

   The song "Daddy's Car" was created in the style of The Beatles,
   after the algorithm analyzed about 45 songs by the legendary
   four-piece.

   Director of Sony CSL in Paris, artificial intelligence expert
   Francois Pashet, says the system, which they have christened
   Flow Machines, expands the songwriting process.

   "It allows one to try many things much more easily. You can
   mix, you can try one style with another style with a sound,"
   Pashet said.

   While he acknowledges that there is a stigma against
   "artificial" creation, he believes it can be a powerful tool.

   "This algorithm, I think aids in creation in this sense, in
   that it makes all the elements of experimentation easier, which
   otherwise would have been too time-consuming or meticulous," he
   added.

   CSL started developing Flow Machines since 2012. Since then,
   the six-person team has developed a number of algorithms
   integrated in the system - there is the one that creates the
   partition sheet, one which can make an arrangement or
   orchestration, and one that extracts elements from the sheet to
   simulate a performance, showing in split-screen how each
   element like chords, bass and percussion would be played.

   French composer Benoit Carré has been working with CSL to
   develop the algorithms, testing how it adapts to his own
   songwriting.

   For the song "Mister Shadow", based on American ballads, the
   algorithm created a soft melody. Carré made a version in which
   the system added an artificial-sounding voice, as he wanted a
   languid sound that emphasized the fact that it comes precisely
   from a computer. He also made a version with a drum track.

   "The element of exploration is as big, as vast as the music
   that exists. This means we can explore small groups of music,
   for instance, songs, we can put in two songs, we can put 5,000
   songs. We can go into pop, we can go into jazz. We are not
   finished exploring, with the help of artificial intelligence, a
   new creativity," Carré said.

   The team is planning to launch albums with songs created
   entirely by artificial intelligence - one with songs based on
   Beatles music, another along the lines of the "Mister Shadow"
   song, one adapting the style of current pop hits, and one a
   collaboration of various artists.

   Pashet said the algorithms ensure that the songs are different
   enough from existing ones to avoid plagiarism.

   Carré, who sang for the band LiliCub and has written songs for
   French artists Johnny Hallyday and Francoise Hardy, said
   composing music with an algorithm does not rob it of soul or
   emotion; normally perceived as integral to the creative
   process.

   "We can find a soul in whatever type of music - music generated
   by a computer, music, as in the 1980s, generated by a
   synthesizer. Music  is in what the person makes of it. It
   doesn't exist alone. And particularly, a song. Because a song
   is a partition sheet, and a lot of things around it," he said.

   Flow Machines is not equipped with prior musical knowledge but
   uses a machine-learning technique. It churns out the song based
   on the data it gathers from the music chosen by the user.

   "What the algorithm will do is always try to cope with your
   constraints, with what you are imposing to the system, to the
   score, the lead sheet - and the algorithm will always try to
   repair if you want , or generate stuff that is at the same time
   compatible with what you imposed and in the same style of the
   training song set," said one of the developers, computer
   scientist Pierre Roy said.

   Former New Order star Peter Hook doesn't like the idea.

   "I've not heard the Beatles' track that supposedly this
   wonderful thing has invented, but I suppose, as a musician, we
   don't want it, do we? We don't want to be put out of a job," he
   told Reuters.

   "Nearly every song I've written, in New Order and outside of
   New Order, has been with somebody else, and that is the beauty
   of it. Writing with a machine - what feedback, what buzz, are
   you going to get from a machine? All machines do is drive you
   crazy. You're forever turning them off and on," he added."

   Sony CSL has not yet determined how authorship of the music
   will be prescribed.

   ADVERTISEMENT

   Our standards: [88]The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.



