Varsity Math: Week 44

   Photo: Luci Gutierrez
   Jul 14, 2016 1:17 pm ET
   [375]4 COMMENTS


   Most of the Varsity Math team is back in the town Logiton,
   where the authorities need their help again.

   Guarding Variety | Junior Varsity

   First, a private security firm asks them for assistance. “You
   guys, old Julius Petersen, owner of the Pentagon Mansion on the
   outskirts of town, is having his annual open house. He’s hired
   us to guard his eclectic collection of objets d’art. In his
   crazy floor plan [below], there are doors in every internal
   wall. If anybody swipes anything, a silent alarm will
   immediately lock down the only door out of the building, but
   then we have to catch the thief. My guards might be anywhere
   when the theft happens, and it could happen in any room. After
   that, first the thief and then each of the guards will be able
   to move from any room to any adjacent room (or stay put) once
   each minute. We can track the thief on video surveillance, but
   we need to get a guard into the same room as the thief at some
   point to apprehend him. I have to pay my guards a lot for an
   assignment like this, so I want to keep the staffing down.”

   Photo: National Museum of Mathematics

   What is the smallest number of guards that will guarantee that
   any single thief can be apprehended within a finite number of
   minutes?

   As the Day Is Wrong | Freshman

   Next, the police chief needs the team’s help. He’s rounded up
   two members of Non Sequitur, the crime ring in Logiton, because
   he’s learned the group is planning to steal the platinum
   doorknobs of the Pentagon Mansion next week. Here’s the
   interrogation of the two ring members, known only as X and Y.

   Chief: So when is this job going down?

   Y: Saturday.

   X: No, Sunday.

   Chief: Hmmm. You’re going to need to fence the doorknobs the
   day after the crime. What day will that be?

   X: Tuesday.

   Y: No, Wednesday.

   Chief: This isn’t making sense! OK, you’ll need to case the
   mansion the day before the crime. When will that be?

   Y: Thursday.

   X: No, Friday!

   Then the chief gets a big break: He learns that the peculiar
   code of honor that X and Y follow requires each of them to give
   exactly one true answer out of every three questions they’re
   asked.

   Which day will Non Sequitur attempt to rob the Pentagon
   Mansion?

   See answers to [376]last week’s puzzles below. Come back next
   week for answers and more puzzles. Note: Comments may include
   spoilers.


   The National Museum of Mathematics (MoMath) is North America’s
   only museum devoted to mathematics. Learn more at
   [377]momath.org.


   [378]Solutions


   For the relay that ended last week, the Fractured Fruit farmer
   brought 312 peaches to the fair. The center three cards
   inTriangulating the Difference add up to 24, and in Crusty
   Conundrum either of the two end slices has the most crust. In
   the remaining problem, Relation Riddle, the other attendees at
   the reunion consist of the following relatives of Finley:
   father, mother, sister, sister’s husband and sister’s three
   children (two girls and one boy).

   [379]See MoMath’s website for extended solutions.





   [383]Previous Back Taxes (Thursday Crossword) [384]Next Host of
   Possibilities (Crossword Contest)


          Save Article
          [385]Sign In to Save
          [386]Subscribe to WSJ


          Text Size
          Regular
          Medium
          Large

          Google+

          Print

   SHOW COMMENTS HIDE COMMENTS (4)
   Failed to load comments
   4 comments
   [387]  Livefyre




   [390]Sign in

   Post comment

   Link
   Newest | Oldest
   Edward Brading
   Edward Brading subscriber 5pts

   As the Day is Wrong.  The robbery will be attempted on
   Saturday.  If Y's first statement is true, then Y's next two
   statements are false, which is consistent with the code.  Also,
   if Y's first statement is true, then X's third statement is
   true and X's first and second statements are false, which is
   consistent with the code.  Running the remaining six days of
   the week through the answers of Y and X does not produce any
   situation in which exactly one statement of Y is true and
   exactly one statement of X is true.
   Dorit Hochbaum
   Dorit Hochbaum subscriber 5pts

   Three guards (G) are required. Even if the Thief (T) knows the
   G positions he will be captured.

   T cannot enter a room X if there is a G in X or if there is a G
   in a neighboring (N) room of X since it will be captured.
   Therefore, 3 G can form a Front of up to 9 adjacent rooms
   (enough to cross the mansion) that T cannot cross or bypass.
   The G strategy is to move towards T, maintaining a sufficiently
   long Front but progressively reducing the space available for T
   until a capture in a finite number of moves.

   Example:  place 3G in the outmost 3 bottom rooms and then move
   each G to its inward N. This forms a 7 room Front. If T is
   below or stays on the Front – it is captured. If T is above,
   the G move upward while controlling a Front of 7-9 adjacent
   rooms so T must always stay on the same side. During the last
   moves the required Front becomes shorter.

   Starting from arbitrary positions the G can always form a
   Front.

   2 G cannot block T in a room with 3 exits – the chase may not
   end.
   John Fuller
   John Fuller user 5pts

   Guarding Variety: each room connects to three others, so three
   guards should be sufficient (plus one on the video
   surveillance, I suppose). If there are only two guards moving
   from room to room, the thief will always have an escape route.
   With three, they should eventually be able to trap the thief in
   a room that only leads to rooms where the guards are located.

   As the Day is Wrong: the job will be on Saturday. Y is correct
   on the day of the job, and X is correct on the day of the
   casing. However, this violates what we already know about
   criminals in Logiton which is that they always tell lies.
   william woolson
   william woolson subscriber 5pts

   Non Sequitur commits the crime on Saturday
   Show More Archives
   Advertisement


