The digital artists

   Visualization tools have helped mathematicians share their work
   in creative and surprising ways – even to rethink what the job
   of a mathematician might entail.

   Take [61]mathematician Fabienne Serrière, who raised US$124,306
   through Kickstarter in 2015 to buy an industrial knitting
   machine. Her dream was to make custom-knit scarves that
   demonstrate cellular automata, mathematical models of cells on
   a grid. To realize her algorithmic design instructions,
   Serrière hacked the code that controls the machine. She now
   works full-time on custom textiles from a Seattle studio.
   In this sculpture by Edmund Harriss, the drill traces are
   programmed to go perpendicular to the growth rings of the tree.
   This makes the finished sculpture a depiction of a concept
   mathematicians know as ‘paths of steepest descent.’ Edmund
   Harriss, Author provided


   [62]Edmund Harriss of the University of Arkansas hacked an
   architectural drilling machine, which he now uses to make
   mathematical sculptures from wood. The control process involves
   some deep ideas from differential geometry. Since his ideas are
   basically about controlling a robot arm, they have wide
   application beyond art. According to his website, Harriss is
   “driven by a passion to communicate the beauty and utility of
   mathematical thinking.”


   Mathematical algorithms power the products made by [63]Nervous
   System, a studio in Massachusetts that was founded in 2007 by
   Jessica Rosenkrantz, a biologist and architect, and Jess
   Louis-Rosenberg, a mathematician. Many of their designs, for
   things like custom jewelry and lampshades, look like naturally
   occurring structures from biology or geology.


   Their first [64]3-D printed dress consists of thousands of
   interlocking pieces designed to fit a particular model. In
   order to print the dress, the designers folded up their virtual
   version, using protein-folding algorithms. A selective laser
   sintering process fused together parts of a block of powder to
   make the dress, then let all the unwanted powder fall away to
   reveal its shape.


   Meanwhile, a delightful collection called [65]Geometry Games
   can help everyone, from elementary school students to
   professional mathematicians, explore the concept of space. The
   project was founded by mathematician Jeff Weeks, one of the
   rock stars of the mathematical world. The iOS version of his
   “Torus Games” teaches children about multiply-connected spaces
   through interactive animation. According to Weeks, the app is
   verging on one million downloads.



