Question 1:

     Imagine a gene that is 108 letters with A, T, G, C in random
     sequence. Assume that every year, there is a random change —
     one of the letters somewhere on this gene mutates and is
     replaced by one of the other three. After each year, you
     compare the current copy of the gene with the original and
     tally how many letters have changed. After a certain time
     “the evolutionary clock will have slowed to a crawl” — that
     is, the number of changed letters will have stopped rising.
     The evolutionary rate from here on is zero. How many letters
     of the original gene will have changed at that point? How
     many years will it take to get to this point? Is the curve
     exponential?

   As the letters of the gene change, a point is reached when the
   probability of a preserved original letter (u) mutating to a
   different one is the same as an already mutated letter (m)
   changing back to the original one. Any change in a u converts
   it to an m, whereas an m has only a one-third chance of
   changing back to a u. So at a point when there are three times
   as many m’s as there are u’s, the evolutionary rate will become
   0. This happens when there are 81 mutated letters
   (three-fourths of 108).

   The second part of this question can be answered in several
   ways, depending on how you define the endpoint. In their
   comments, readers obtained different answers for just this
   reason. Let’s consider a few of these endpoint choices.

   One point of view looks at the expected, or average, number of
   mutated letters. Since there is always a finite, albeit
   diminishing, probability that some particular letter, just by
   chance, remains unchanged for thousands or even millions of
   years, the expected number of mutations approaches ever closer
   to 81 over time in an asymptotic manner but never quite reaches
   this value. So one way to proceed is to define an endpoint of
   80.5 as [14]Michael did. This approximation is based on the
   fact that, at a point this close to equilibrium, there is a 50
   percent chance that the number of mutations will increase the
   next year and push the total number over 81. The endpoint in
   this case takes 410 years.


   Incidentally, this quick method of using the average
   expectation up to a point close to the desired value, and then
   using the fluctuations to “go over the top,” brings to mind the
   following elementary school puzzle: A snail is at the bottom of
   a 20-foot well. Every day, it climbs upward 2 feet during the
   day, but slips back 1 foot during the night. After how many
   days of doing this will it be out of the well?

   If you came up with 20, think again! The actual answer
   ([15]click here to reveal): 18.5. Here too, we use the average
   up to a point, and then rely on the discrete fluctuations to
   get over the top.


   For more accurate methods, several readers turned to the
   mathematics of [16]Markov chains or Markov processes: In such
   processes, as in gene evolution, there is a chain of nodes
   whose state at a given time completely determines the
   possibilities available to it in the future , without the need
   for a prior history. There are sophisticated mathematical
   techniques involving things like “finding eigenvalues of
   [17]transition matrices” that mathematicians use to deal with
   Markov processes. But that does not mean that the ideas behind
   these processes are difficult to grasp — they just involve the
   repeated applications of some simple formulas. In the present
   problem, you can easily model the expected value of the gene’s
   mutations in a spreadsheet using two columns with two simple
   repeated formulas as described below (you can do it with a
   single column, but the two-column version is a little easier to
   understand). In column A, put the numbers of consecutive years
   starting from 0 in cell A2, going down the rows all the way to
   1000 at A1002. Label cell B1 in Column B “Original” and cell C1
   in Column C “Mutated.” In year 0, we start with 108 original
   letters and no mutated ones, so put 108 in cell B2 and 0 in
   cell C2. In the next row we will place the two formulas that
   describe how the numbers change from year to year. The number
   of original letters can decrease by a mutation that strikes an
   original letter from the previous year (probability = u/108) or
   can increase by a mutated letter reverting back to the
   original, which will happen a third of the time (probability =
   (m/108)/3). This is captured by the following formula in cell
   B3: = B2-(B2/108)+(C2/108)/3. Similarly, the change in the
   number of mutated letters based on the previous year is given
   by the following formula in cell C3: = C2-(C2/108)/3) + B2/108.
   These formulas can be copied over all the 1,000 rows and voilà,
   you can see how the number of expected mutations changes,
   inching ever closer to 81 as the years go by, passing 80.5 at
   410 years.


   The two equations shown above can be combined with some algebra
   into a single iterated function: m[n ]= (80/81)m[n-1 ]+1 where
   m[n] is the expected number of mutated genes in year n. This
   yields the following exponential formula, described by [18]Mark
   P: m[n]=81-81*(80/81)^n. This is an exact exponential, which
   covers half the remaining distance to 81 mutations about every
   56 years. The number of mutations starts off by increasing
   rapidly, then tails off and slows to a crawl.


   A second approach to solving this problem, rather than looking
   at the expected values, is called the “hitting time,” and is
   standard in Markov processes. Here, the number 81, the dynamic
   equilibrium point, is treated as the “absorbing node.” This
   means that whenever any gene reaches 81 mutations, it is
   considered to have hit its target and is “absorbed,” and the
   future evolution of this gene is not considered. Using this
   approach, [19]Mark P. got an answer of 262 years, while
   [20]Ashish and [21]Dennis obtained 281.8 years.


   The reason for the difference can be explained as follows.
   Imagine that there are, say, 1000 separate isolated populations
   that all have the same evolving gene, with the same mutation
   rate. The question that Mark P. answered is: How many years
   will it take for 50 percent of these gene populations to reach
   81 mutations? This is the median value. Ashish and Dennis, on
   the other hand, found the average time for all the 1000 genes
   to reach 81 mutations. This time is slightly longer because
   there will be some genes that will take far longer times just
   by chance. The spreadsheet method that I described above can be
   used to obtain both these answers. It just takes a larger
   spreadsheet — one that has 82 columns, one for each number of
   possible mutated letters from 0 to 81, again having simple
   formulas relating the number of mutations from one year to the
   next.

   Note that the “hitting time” approach gives a smaller number
   than the expected value of about 400 years that we calculated
   earlier. This is because the hitting method does not take into
   account the fact that the genes keep changing even after
   reaching 81 mutations, and some may dip below this number by
   random reversals, even after initially hitting the number
   earlier. So the hitting approach overestimates the actual
   proportion of genes with a given number of mutations in any
   year. If continued evolution is included in the model, as can
   be done by extending the humble spreadsheet approach to 109
   columns, you can see that the first time that 50 percent of the
   genes actually have 81 or more mutations in a given year is
   closer to the expected value we calculated earlier — about 400
   years.


