[229]Higher Ed


Donald Trump's Plan For America's Schools





    [233] javascript:void(0);

   September 25, 20166:00 AM ET
   [234]Cory Turner - Square


   [235]Cory Turner
   [236]Twitter


   [237]Eric Westervelt
   [238]Twitter
   [239]Enlarge this image


   In speeches and appearances, Republican presidential candidate
   Donald Trump has called for more choice, ending Common Core,
   and gutting the U.S. Education Department. LA Johnson/NPR hide
   caption
   toggle caption
   LA Johnson/NPR

   In speeches and appearances, Republican presidential candidate
   Donald Trump has called for more choice, ending Common Core,
   and gutting the U.S. Education Department.
   LA Johnson/NPR

   "I'm a tremendous believer in education."

   So begins a [240]campaign ad for Republican presidential
   nominee Donald J. Trump.


   But what does that mean?

   What does Trump believe about how we should fund and fix our
   schools, train and pay our teachers, and, most importantly,
   educate every child whether they're rich or poor, fluent in
   English or anything but, learning disabled or two grades ahead?

   To these questions the candidate has offered few clear answers.

   "Donald Trump's policy positions are performance art." That
   criticism comes not from the left but from [241]Rick Hess, who
   studies education policy at the right-leaning [242]American
   Enterprise Institute. And, Hess says, "it is an immense mistake
   to take any of it all that seriously."


   Hoping to flesh out Trump's education ideas ahead of tomorrow's
   big presidential debate, we asked his campaign for help. They
   never got back to us.

   We also reached out to the two men who, as [243]reported by
   Education Week, have been named to the candidate's presidential
   transition team for education. Both said they could not talk
   without permission from the Trump campaign, permission that was
   not granted.


   And so, in trying to get a picture of his education platform,
   we're left mostly with the candidate's own words.

   Let's start with the rest of that campaign ad:

   Local Control

   "I'm a tremendous believer in education. But education has to
   be at a local level," Trump says from his leather office chair,
   looking directly into the camera. "We cannot have the
   bureaucrats in Washington telling you how to manage your
   child's education."

   This is a common theme for Trump: Washington needs to butt out
   of our schools.

   "There's no failed policy more in need of urgent change than
   our government-run education monopoly," he said earlier this
   month at a campaign stop in Cleveland.

   In this story line, schools are the business of the local
   community — of the district — and the U.S. Department of
   Education is Public Enemy No. 1, pushing down onerous rules
   that make life harder for educators, students and parents.

   While this may sound more like a feeling than a policy
   position, stay tuned:

   On Oct. 18, 2015, Trump [244]told "Fox News Sunday" host Chris
   Wallace that, if elected President, he would consider cutting
   the Education Department entirely.


   That would be a profound policy shift from past presidents and
   one worth reckoning with briefly here.

   It's not clear if Trump, in cutting the Department, would also
   cut the services that it provides, but, since his conversation
   with Wallace was in the context of broader spending cuts it's
   reasonable to assume he would.

   Those services include providing roughly $15 billion in Title I
   funds to help schools that educate at-risk students, more than
   $12 billion for students with special needs, and some $29
   billion in Pell Grants to help low-income students pay for
   college (all according to 2016 Congressional appropriations).

   Common Core

   On February 10, 2016, Trump tweeted: "I have been consistent in
   my opposition to Common Core. Get rid of Common Core — keep
   education local!"

   In that campaign ad on his website, Trump is even more
   colorful: "Common Core is a total disaster. We can't let it
   continue."

   The Common Core are learning standards in math and English
   language arts that were developed through a collaboration
   between the National Governors Association and the Council of
   Chief State School Officers. According to the Core's
   [245]website, they're being used in 42 states and the District
   of Columbia.


   Trump's loathing for the Core needs unpacking — because you
   have to understand how the standards were created to understand
   how schools can be "rid of" them.

   The Core were adopted by states at the state level. There was
   no top-down vote from Congress, no presidential signature. Yes,
   President Obama and his Education Department dangled money in
   front of states who agreed to do many things, including adopt
   rigorous new standards. But Washington could not, and did not,
   force the Core on states. As such, if states want to repeal the
   standards, they can [246]and have. But a President Trump ...
   couldn't.


   Besides, if he tried, it might feel an awful lot like "the
   bureaucrats in Washington telling you how to manage your
   child's education."

   School Choice

   Earlier this month, in Cleveland, Trump unveiled perhaps the
   most specific education [247]proposal of his campaign.


   "As president, I will establish the national goal of providing
   school choice to every American child living in poverty," Trump
   said. "If we can put a man on the moon, dig out the Panama
   Canal and win two world wars, then I have no doubt that we as a
   nation can provide school choice to every disadvantaged child
   in America."

   The plan would involve a $20 billion government investment,
   "reprioritizing existing federal dollars." The money would go
   to states as block grants and follow disadvantaged students
   wherever they go: to a traditional public school in their
   neighborhood or elsewhere, a charter school or even a private
   school.

   While Trump made clear the $20 billion would not be new money,
   he did not say where he would find that much old money to
   reprioritize.

   This idea, known as portability, is [248]popular in
   conservative circles because, it is assumed, the competition
   that comes with choice would force struggling public schools to
   improve or close. But it [249]worries many student advocates
   because, they say, it would also drain money from the schools
   that need it most and send taxpayer dollars to well-resourced
   private schools.


   Higher Education

   As with K-12, Trump has said little in detail about planned
   policies for higher education.

   In May, a senior Trump policy advisor, Sam Clovis, did tell
   [250]Inside Higher Ed that a Trump administration would work to
   get the government out of the student loan business and restore
   lending to private banks. The debt issue has gotten a fair
   amount of attention, as we've covered [251]here, [252]here and
   [253]here, among other stories.


   "We think it (student loans) should be marketplace and market
   driven," Clovis told Inside Higher Ed. He also said Trump
   rejects President Obama's proposals to make community college
   free for new high school graduates.

   Would a push to privatize student lending work?

   "I just don't think that's realistic," says Eric Hanushek, a
   Senior Fellow at the [254]Hoover Institution, a
   conservative-leaning think tank at Stanford University. The
   government has historically played a key lending role and is
   likely to continue, Hanushek says. "Private lenders are not
   about to enter into that market sufficiently to make loans to
   all students. It would be wise not to get the government out of
   student loans altogether."


   The basic mechanics of implementing that kind of
   public-to-private switch, says [255]Deborah Seymour with the
   American Council on Education, "would require such a
   complicated plan that making that happen might take longer than
   he's probably currently projecting."


   Hanushek adds that many of Trump's statements on education and
   other topics "are vague, and you could interpret them in many
   ways."

   Child Care

   Finally, Trump's take on [256]childcare. The pitch, on his
   website, tells us what most parents know all-too-well: "Raising
   a child is now the single greatest expense for most American
   families — even exceeding the cost of housing in much of the
   country."


   What would President Trump do about that?

   He's proposed making all childcare costs tax-deductible for
   kids up to 13 years old — and for up to four children per
   household. Deductions would be limited to a state's average
   childcare cost and to families earning less than $500,000 a
   year.

   Returning to a common theme for Trump — choice — the proposal
   would cover "a variety of different kinds of
   childcare—institutional, private, nursery school, afterschool
   care, and enrichment activities."

   Trump's proposal, which he unveiled earlier this month, would
   also provide six weeks of unemployment benefits to all new
   mothers. While [257]states cap those benefits, the proposal
   would be an improvement for many new moms and a big change from
   current federal policy (which pays them nothing). That said,
   the plan did raise eyebrows for one word conspicuously missing:
   [258]Dads.


   A lot to digest — but still surprisingly few classroom
   specifics.

   Both candidates, Eric Hanushek says, have largely side-stepped
   specifics about K-12 education. Clinton talks about universal
   pre-K and Trump a little about student loans, he says, "but
   there's this gaping hole in the middle called K-12 education."
   It's troubling, Hanushek says, as education is "second only to
   national security" in national importance.




    [262] javascript:void(0);


