By [35]Siobhan Roberts


     June 29, 2016


   [36]The mathematician Kurt Gödel’s incompleteness theorem ranks
   in scientific folklore with Einstein’s relativity and
   Heisenberg’s uncertainty. The mathematician Kurt Gödel’s
   incompleteness theorem ranks in scientific folklore with
   Einstein’s relativity and Heisenberg’s
   uncertainty.CreditPHOTOGRAPH BY ALFRED EISENSTAEDT / THE LIFE
   PICTURE COLLECTION / GETTY


   In June of 1975, the Office of the White House Press Secretary
   announced President Gerald R. Ford’s picks for the National
   Medal of Science. One went to the Austrian-born mathematician
   and logician Kurt Gödel. Nicknamed Mr. Why by his parents,
   Gödel was known to a subset of his constituents as, simply,
   God. He received fan mail from all over the world, archiving it
   into files of “autograph requests,” “inquiries from students
   and amateurs,” “letters of appreciation,” and “crank
   correspondence.” A self-described “dunce fool of Mathematics”
   in West Bengal wrote seeking Gödel’s “Guruship,” and a svelte
   math teacher in California confessed that she’d taken the
   liberty of enlarging a photo of Gödel to make a poster for her
   classroom. (She’d also taken the liberty of enclosing a
   snapshot of herself.) Ultimately, Gödel came to be compared not
   only to [37]his friend Albert Einstein but also to Franz Kafka.
   Such was the nature of his contribution—only a handful of
   theorems, but all of them monumental and fantastical.


   Gödel’s masterpiece was his incompleteness theorem, which ranks
   in scientific folklore with [38]Einstein’s relativity and
   Heisenberg’s uncertainty. Promulgated in Vienna in the early
   nineteen-thirties, the notion of incompleteness threw
   mathematics into a hall of mirrors, where it reflected upon
   itself to alluring, if disorienting, effect: the theorem
   proved, using mathematics, that mathematics could not prove all
   of mathematics. Of course, it has a proper and technically
   precise formulation, but the late logician Verena Huber-Dyson
   paraphrased it for me as follows: “There is more to truth than
   can be caught by proof.” Or, as the British novelist Zia Haider
   Rahman put it in his award-winning début, “In the Light of What
   We Know,” “Within any given system, there are claims which are
   true but which cannot be proven to be true.”


   So although Gödel published his results eighty-five years ago,
   the theorem endures in the popular imagination. This month, a
   group of latter-day Gödelians convened on Thursday nights for a
   crash course in incompleteness, on the roster at the Brooklyn
   Institute for Social Research. One syllabus text promised
   “Gödel Without (Too Many) Tears,” while supplementary reading
   unpacked his work [39]“in Words of One Syllable.” According to
   “Gödel’s Theorem: An Incomplete Guide to Its Use and Abuse,”
   the chameleon interpretations emerge in discussions of math,
   philosophy, computer science, and artificial intelligence, as
   one might expect, but also in ruminations on physics,
   evolution, religion, atheism, poetry, hip-hop, dating,
   politics, and even the Constitution. (Famously, Gödel informed
   the judge at his U.S. citizenship hearing about an
   inconsistency that he had discovered in the Constitution, which
   would allow a dictator to rise in America.)


   The students in the incompleteness class, held at the Brooklyn
   Commons, included a computer scientist obsessed with recursion
   (that is, self-referential things, like Russian nesting dolls
   or Escher’s drawing of a hand drawing a hand); a public-health
   nutritionist with a fondness for her “Philoslothical” T-shirt;
   a philosopher in the tradition of American pragmatism; an ad
   man versed in the classics; and a private-school teacher who’d
   spent a lonely, life-changing winter reading Douglas
   Hofstadter’s “Gödel, Escher, Bach,” which won the Pulitzer in
   1980. Even Hofstadter, a professor of cognitive science at
   Indiana University, still has Gödel on the brain. He delivered
   two talks on the logician recently, billing him as “The True
   Inventor of Programming Languages and Data Structures.” When I
   told Hofstadter about the course—not everyone’s ideal Thursday
   night out on the town—he said, “It ought to be quite fun.”

   In total, eight people enrolled for the class, a fitting
   number, since “8” rotated by ninety degrees is “∞,” and
   infinity is, in a sense, where the trouble began with this
   trippy episode in the history of mathematics. In the nineteenth
   century, the German mathematician Georg Cantor launched an
   investigation into various sizes of infinities, thereby
   inventing set theory, which became an overarching paradigm for
   mathematics. “A set is a Many that allows itself to be thought
   of as a One,” Cantor said. But, from nearby realms of logic,
   paradoxes emerged, such as the Russell set, the set of all sets
   that do not contain themselves. In the early twentieth century,
   Bertrand Russell and Alfred North Whitehead, with “Principia
   Mathematica,” and David Hilbert, with “Hilbert’s Program,”
   attempted to construct a solid foundation for mathematics,
   creating a formal system based on axioms and rules. Gödel, with
   his incompleteness theorem (two theorems, actually), put an end
   to these dreams. He proved, to borrow from the course outline:

     For any consistent axiomatic formal system that can express
     facts about basic arithmetic:

     1) There are true statements that are unprovable within the
     system.

     2) The system’s consistency cannot be proven within the
     system.

   Puzzled? Russell admitted the same. He wondered, “Are we to
   think that 2+2 is not 4, but 4.001?”

   A mathematician is said to be a machine for turning coffee into
   theorems, and at that Gödel excelled, although he said that the
   coffee in Vienna was wretched. For Peter O’Hearn, an
   engineering manager at Facebook and professor at University
   College London, the incompleteness “wow moment” was fuelled by
   visits to the brewpub during graduate school. O’Hearn is the
   co-recipient of this year’s Gödel Prize—he and a colleague,
   Stephen Brookes, invented concurrent separation logic, a
   revolutionary proof system for computer software. “Gödel’s
   theorem has a major impact on what all computer scientists do,”
   he told me. “It puts a fundamental limit on questions we can
   answer with computers. It tells us to go for approximation—more
   approximate solutions, which find many right answers, but not
   all right answers. That’s a positive, because it constrains me
   from trying to do stupid things, trying to do impossible
   things.”

   At the Brooklyn Commons, a keg of Turmeric Sunrise kombucha was
   the popular drink during class breaks, which people spent
   pondering the pronunciation of “Gödel.” (“Goy-del?” “Good-ul?”
   “Girdle?”) I asked my classmates whether they had heard of the
   sci-fi writer Rudy Rucker’s book “Spacetime Donuts,” which
   includes a minor character named Professor G. Kurtowski. The
   answer was no, but as the American pragmatist noted, “Kurtowski
   is significantly easier to pronounce than ‘Guuuudel.’ ” In
   Gödel’s archives, there is a full file of letters from Rucker.
   “I was looking for a guru,” Rucker told me. He first visited
   with the great man in 1972, as a graduate student, and
   thereupon Gödel joined his other mentors—Frank Zappa, Robert
   Crumb, William Burroughs, and Thomas Pynchon. Pynchon, in his
   novel “Gravity’s Rainbow,” paraphrased incompleteness by
   mapping it onto Murphy’s Law, “that brash Irish proletarian
   restatement of Gödel’s Theorem—when everything has been taken
   care of, when nothing can go wrong, or even surprise us …
   something will.” “Yeah,” our instructor said. “Metaphorically,
   yeah, I can see it.”

   As the course progressed, the Gödelians remained divided in
   their enlightenment. An early verdict, from a lawyer studying
   for the bar, was that Gödel, with his loopy logic, seemed to be
   cheating. Later, the private-school teacher raised his hand and
   declared that the last bit of chalk-and-talk instruction made
   perfect sense. From my distractible perspective across the
   table, though, his semi-eureka experience looked like the
   misinterpretation of a sugar high, since he’d just eaten seven
   Oreo Thins from the pile of communal snacks. And, anyway, it
   would all come to nothing if not incompleteness.

   Quoted archival text from the Kurt Gödel Papers, held by the
   Institute for Advanced Study, in Princeton, New Jersey, and on
   deposit at the Firestone Library.

   Siobhan Roberts is the author of “Genius at Play: The Curious
   Mind of John Horton Conway.”


      More:




