Maths in a minute: Poincaré and the beginnings of chaos

   Submitted by Marianne on February 28, 2017
   Hotel

   Henri Poincaré (1854 - 1912) — looking as if he were stunned by
   his own discovery.

   In 1887 King Oscar II of Sweden and Norway offered a prize for
   the solution of an important maths problem. Suppose you have a
   number of celestial bodies (for example several planets and the
   Sun), and you know their masses and the speed and direction
   they are moving in at some given point in time. Their future
   motion is described by Newton's [17]laws of motion and, since
   the bodies exert a gravitational pull on each other, by his
   [18]universal law of gravitation. Use those laws to calculate
   the trajectories of the bodies.


   King Oscar's prize was won three years after it was launched,
   in 1890, by the French mathematician [19]Henri Poincaré (1854 -
   1912), who restricted himself to the case in which there are
   just three bodies. After winning the prize Poincaré discovered
   a major flaw in his argument, putting him in a rather
   embarrassing situation since his manuscript was to be published
   for the King's birthday within a few weeks' time. Honourably,
   Poincaré admitted his mistake and a new manuscript was
   published a year later.


   What Poincaré discovered in his feverish attempt to correct his
   work was that even this seemingly simple problem suffered from
   what is now called the butterfly effect, or, more technically,
   sensitive dependence on initial conditions. The smallest
   variation in the initial values (that is, the mass, location,
   speed and direction of motion of the bodies) can build up over
   time into huge discrepancies. You therefore can't reliably
   predict the motion of the planets over time because you can't
   possibly know the initial values with an infinite degree of
   accuracy.

   Poincaré later suggested that the phenomenon might be
   ubiquitous, arising in many other situations, including in
   meteorology. With the advent of computers, which enabled the
   many calculations that were necessary to make the effect
   apparent, it became clear that he was right. Unknowingly,
   Poincaré had laid the foundations of chaos theory.

   You can [20]read more about chaos theory on Plus.




