36 thoughts on “Other Ways to Carve Up the Math Curriculum”

    1. anshgupta1234 on [30]November 16, 2016 at 12:08 am said:
       Nice post. But that’s common in your blog😊
       [31]Reply ↓
    2. [32]Benjamin Freitag on [33]November 16, 2016 at 12:13 am
       said:
       That “Go Forth and Prosper” curriculum sound absolutely
       AMAZING! The high school math department I work with has
       actually tried to move in this direction with what limited
       resources we have in the way of teachers and time.
       [34]Reply ↓
    3. Andy on [35]November 16, 2016 at 12:26 am said:
       How does it make any sense to have 2 years of AP Math????
       The AP Curriculum isn’t even written like that!
       Anyone who wants to put the work into building one of these
       proposals out into a full blown plan, or just writing a
       textbook for one of the non-traditional courses I’m on
       board.
       [36]Reply ↓

            I definitely like proposal 2 the best, as it would
            allow for collaboration among departments and give
            students a real opportunity to try things and go for
            what they are interested. As a mathematician first and
            a teacher second and as a hobby programmer I like
            proposal 2 the most.
            Teaching a class on mathematical programming is crazy
            interesting and math for mathematicians would be right
            up my alley.
            Proposal 2 also seems like it could easily satisfy all
            of the Common Core requirements that those of us in
            the States have to deal with.
            [38]Reply ↓
    4. [39]annwjwhite on [40]November 16, 2016 at 12:53 am said:
       I like what you have here. Get the word out. This is more
       user friendly and on target.
       [41]Reply ↓
    5. [42]Shecky R on [43]November 16, 2016 at 5:31 am said:
       Super! Makes me want to go back to high school again… (if
       they would follow ANY of these suggestions in place of what
       I had)
       [44]Reply ↓
    6. [45]survivinginjapan on [46]November 16, 2016 at 7:32 am
       said:
       If only math was this interesting when I was still
       studying… 😆
       [47]Reply ↓
    7. Wendy vanden Heuvel on [48]November 16, 2016 at 8:03 am
       said:
       hi Ben ,
       My daughter is a musician and we have been searching for
       great ways to teach her Math, I saw that you had a
       section-Math for Artists, could you point me into some
       interesting books, or ways that would be good to teach Math
       for people like this. I love your blog, it is the first
       time someone’s thinking about Math has made sense.
       [49]Reply ↓

            Take a look at the [52]Art of mathematics series.
            There is a lot of great material, and the spirit of
            their approach is fantastic.
            Other readers, and Ben himself, will have other
            suggestions, of course…
            [53]Reply ↓
               o [54]Wendy vanden Heuvel on [55]November 17, 2016
                 at 7:30 am said:
                 Thank you!
                 [56]Reply ↓
    8. [57]Wendy vanden Heuvel on [58]November 16, 2016 at 8:04 am
       said:
       PS) She is in 11th grade.
       [59]Reply ↓
    9. Pouncer on [60]November 16, 2016 at 8:54 am said:
       Given a diversity of high schools for parents and students
       to choose among, there would be no problem in implementing
       any or all of these ideas — not all at any one school, of
       course.
       Given a federal mandate for “common core” — or any similar
       requirement — and only one curricular sequence per school
       district (in cities, one district encompasses several high
       schools) only one idea will “win” — and all the parents and
       students who might prefer and benefit from an alternative
       will LOSE.
       Even if any one of these ideas is better than status quo,
       and even if a district makes that “improvement”, all those
       who would choose otherwise lose because they have no
       choice.
       [61]Reply ↓
   10. [62]Carl on [63]November 16, 2016 at 12:42 pm said:
       Interesting. I come from a high school which didn’t do
       calculus at all. Instead, third year algebra included
       probability, linear algebra and analytic geometry. Linear
       algebra was the worst — no applications whatsoever. And why
       is Cramer’s Rule ever taught? Gaussian elimination follows
       easily enough from systems of equations.
       The other most useless subject was going in depth with
       complex numbers. Unless you go into quantum mechanics,
       circuit theory, or other dynamic modeling that involves
       Laplace transforms, complex numbers are mostly a curiosity.
       —
       Love your idea of making high school math more applied. Let
       me throw in one more application that used to be part of
       the core liberal arts curriculum back in the middle ages:
       statics. Statics has applications for any who would build.
       By going in depth with statics you can teach vectors
       without also having to teach calculus concepts at the same
       time, as is traditional in physics. The first weeks of
       physics are overwhelming because vectors and calculus
       concepts are taught in parallel. It’s like teaching
       juggling while riding a unicycle.
       Another reform would be to teach calculus numerically.
       Numerical methods are to calculus what counting on your
       fingers is to arithmetic. Imagine teaching first graders
       the topology of real numbers before learning how to count!
       That’s sort of what we do with calculus. With numerical
       methods, we can introduce interesting problems early.
       My math track would look something like this:
       basic algebra -> financial applications -> statistics
       geometry -> statics -> linear algebra for manipulating
       vectors
       computer programming -> beginning calculus and differential
       equations using numerical methods
       I leave it as an exercise for the reader as to how to turn
       these tracks into actual curricula. I would note that for
       brighter students, the beginning algebra could start in
       eighth grade.
       [64]Reply ↓

            Funny to hear you say that there are no applications
            to linear algebra. To me it is one the the most
            practical fields of mathematics.
            The whole mathematica software program is basically a
            big linear-algebra engine.
            A complex number is a vector. Oh, but you don’t like
            complex numbers either, more on that later
            Differentiation is a linear operator.
            The covariance in statistics is an inner product.
            (This is my life)
            The Heisenberg uncertainty principle falls-out from
            the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality.
            Complex numbers appear whenever there is a wave a
            vibration, an oscillation, and even a rotation. Quite
            a lot more applications than just signal processing
            and quantum mechanics.
            You want to teach vectors, but don’t want to teach
            linear algebra? The two go hand-in-hand.
            [66]Reply ↓
               o [67]Carl on [68]November 17, 2016 at 8:03 am
                 said:
                 I said there was no applications of linear
                 algebra as it was taught to me in high school. If
                 you look at my proposed curriculum, it includes
                 linear algebra. The lead in is vector geometry
                 and statics. And yes, you could come back to
                 matrices when doing my proposed numerical
                 calculus course. They are pretty handy for
                 solving differential equations.
                 I personally use complex numbers and get annoyed
                 at computer languages which don’t include them.
                 (Java!) But I’m a physicist.
                 How many people do wave mechanics? Seriously? Now
                 we are talking partial differential equations!
                 Maybe this can wait until college. For those who
                 do, going deeper into complex numbers can be
                 handled at that point.
                 The question before us is what to teach high
                 school students, the majority of which will never
                 become mathematicians, engineers, or physicists.
                 Only a tiny fraction of such students will even
                 need to know how to get all the imaginary bits
                 out of the denominator. I had limited use for
                 such things until I took up designing
                 loudspeakers as a hobby. Complex polynomial
                 fractions figure in crossover design big time.
                 (Quantum mechanics has complex numbers but they
                 don’t generally show up as polynomials in a
                 denominator.)
                 The simpler bits of linear algebra are quite
                 generally useful. Anyone who wants to make a
                 computer game needs basic numerical differential
                 equations and the ability to manipulate vectors.
                 Linear algebra is needed for analyzing trusses
                 and the like. Statics makes for a clear use case
                 for linear algebra.
                 Everyone who votes should have some knowledge of
                 probability and statistics. It is also handy to
                 have some intuition of dynamical systems, to
                 realize that cause and effect can be quite
                 separate in time. The nascent central planner
                 needs to experience chaos as well. It only takes
                 a system of three equations to produce chaos, if
                 I recall correctly. (It’s been a quarter
                 century…)
                 [69]Reply ↓
                      said:
                      Thanks for the feedback.
                      I suppose if there were one unit I would add
                      to the math curriculum, it would be Excel.
                      Functions, financial calculations, numerical
                      methods, etc. Handy tool, and something that
                      a whole lot of people use “in the real
                      world.”
   11. Doug M on [71]November 16, 2016 at 1:18 pm said:
       Are there really 2 years of AP calculus. As I a remember
       there is the AB and the BC test. The BC test covers
       everything that the AB test covers plus a little bit extra.
       But that little bit extra is not a full year’s wort of
       material. After AB the student should be ready for
       differential Equations, Linear Algebra and multi-variate
       calculus.
       Regarding Stats — I think that knowing calculus makes it
       much easier to learn the the subtleties of probability and
       statistics. How can you teach the central limit theorem if
       you haven’t defined a limit?
       In my personal experience, I learned the theory of
       probability by playing Dungeons & Dragons.
       And what I have learned in statistics, is that if you
       torture your statistics, they will confess to anything.
       [72]Reply ↓
   12. [73]Máté Wierdl on [74]November 16, 2016 at 4:09 pm said:
       I see one crucial problem here: the power of math is that a
       single language is used to tackle diverse practical
       applications. You are suggesting to go the other way
       around, and focus on the applications.
       The fact is that most people don’t use math in their jobs.
       The main utility of math for the general public should be
       to teach kids to think, to ask “why”, and be able to answer
       such questions.
       Your focus is more on the “how”, and it calls for math
       technology more than anything else. For applications of
       math, you don’t need much understanding of the math
       concepts. What’s missing more and more is the understanding
       of math–and the test centered education are to be blamed.
       I think a better approach to teach math is to introduce a
       math concept via a real life example, so kids see that the
       concept is not just some abstract nonsense, but is rooted
       in their lives (like talk about 6 apples). Then understand
       the new concept in the mathematical framework (like what is
       6 as a number). Then show diverse applications (like we can
       take not just 6 apples but 6 TVs or 6 whales).
       The other problem with your proposal is that it is just too
       much stuff. Even the best high school students would have
       difficulty completing it. Kids would be able to calculate %
       without understanding what they are doing. There would be
       no time to really understand % (and hence fractions).
       To tell you the truth, I never understood the enormous
       focus on calculus. It’s a very complicated subject, and
       going beyond, say, an intuitive understanding of
       instantaneous speed makes little sense for the average high
       school student. On the other hand, a good, interesting,
       slow paced, playful exposition of combinatorics would fit
       those teenager minds and the applications of math much
       better.
       Here is the, imo, right amount of math and “application”.
       The joy and the understanding of combinatorics clearly
       doesn’t come from the usefulness of the practical
       application.


       IFRAME:
       =1&fs=1&autohide=2&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1
       &wmode=transparent


       [76]Reply ↓

            Calculus is enormously useful for understanding
            dynamical systems. Calculus is mind-numbing as it is
            generally taught because of the mathematicians’ love
            of rigor. Go lighter on rigor on the first pass and
            calculus makes sense.
            But the real key is to go straight to numerical
            methods. Most of the work in a typical calculus class
            is working out closed form solutions — which is a lot
            of work and only applies to some special cases. Such
            work does belong in the curriculum at some point, but
            maybe it should come a bit later — after students
            experience Euler’s method blowing up in their faces.
            [79]Reply ↓
               o [80]Máté Wierdl on [81]November 17, 2016 at 1:04
                 pm said:
                 “Calculus is enormously useful for understanding
                 dynamical systems. ”
                 Even from a utilitarian viewpoint: How many
                 people will use dynamical systems?
                 But the main goal of teaching anything in K-8 and
                 in high school is not about meeting possible
                 applications. Despite the hype, the vast majority
                 of kids do not use math in their lives.
                 Teaching kids about instantaneous speed makes
                 sense, but beyond that? Why should the average
                 student need to be able to differentiate crazy
                 functions, learn the product rule, etc?
                 In general, teaching something which is hard to
                 motivate needs to be avoided in K-12. Saying
                 “Yeah, calculating all kinds of derivatives,
                 numerical errors, standard deviations seems
                 pointless to you now, but you’ll find it
                 important later in life” is a poor argument, imo.
                 [82]Reply ↓
                      said:
                      People misunderstand dynamical systems every
                      time they blame current conditions on
                      current leadership. Building an intuition
                      that systems do not respond instantaneously
                      to “forces” is important.
                      Going straight to numeric allows one to look
                      at interesting problems without the product
                      rule, etc. Start with Euler’s method and
                      when it breaks down dig deeper.
                      Mix it with computer programming and you can
                      relate the material with something very
                      familiar to students: video games.
                      4:10 pm said:
                      “Building an intuition that systems do not
                      respond instantaneously to “forces” is
                      important.”
                      For the general student audience?
                      As it is, the math curriculum (and most
                      other curriculum) is way overstuffed with
                      “important” things for kids to learn. The
                      main reason for math anxiety is that the
                      speed with which the material needs to be
                      learned leaves most kids behind.
                      What you guys recommend here is exciting,
                      but would effectively double the stress on
                      kids. And stress results in burnt out kids
                      and math haters.
   13. [87]maddemaddigger on [88]November 17, 2016 at 7:36 am
       said:
       If I were to change the curriculum, I would start in grade
       7 and focus on the connections between topics rather than
       teaching them seperately
       We could start with the big topic of “Mathematical
       reasoning” in grade 7, but split into two parts.
       Combinatorics (with “ad hoc”-solutions” first) and geometry
       (with a nice and elegant theory), possibly presenting both
       as views on algebra (which will therefore implicitly be
       taught), e.q. rationals could easily be introduced using
       geometry rather than the usual cake-cutting routine, also
       we can introduce coordinate systems here and start with
       some linear equations from a geometric point of view.
       8th grade will then start with reviewing linear equations
       from a more abstract point of view: We can now introduce
       the concept of functions as ways to transform problems from
       one subject into another (e.g. geometry algebra). We
       continue the geometric studies with these new tools and
       discover the interscept theorem and the Pythagorean theorem
       and get more functions out of them (rational functions,
       quadratics, square roots).
       In 9th grade, we will leave the subject of flat, algebraic
       geometry. As we now have a basic understanding of functions
       and geometry, we can get further in abstraction: For
       geometry, we can study three dimensional objects and in
       terms of functions we try to generalize our understanding
       to discrete, combinatorial problems to see, that we need to
       develop a concept of probability (and do so).
       10th grade can now focus on two things: Basic calculus and
       statistics. Thereby basic calculus will include introducing
       trigonometric, exponential and logarithmic functions (the
       first in the context of reviewing geometry), describing
       graphs based on their term and related topics which _don’t_
       need integration or differentiation (but give a basic
       understanding of limits in an intuitive way). Statistics on
       the other hand will be discussing concepts of probability,
       reliability etc. on a basic, discrete level.
       11th grade will aim to bring the now separated topics of
       algebra, geometry, Calculus and Statistics back together.
       We will now discuss graphs of functions as geometric
       objects and in view of geometry try to define limits more
       precisely and then introduce derivation motivated by
       geometry, get back to three dimensional objects and their
       algebraic representation (in terms of coordinates) and
       combine Calculus and statistics by looking at distributions
       for random variables in a large set.
       12th grade will then be mostly focused on computations and
       some integration, which is good to combine, since in many
       cases integration is not easily possible. However, it will
       be about applying all of the previously discussed topics,
       which means that the problems will include many different
       aspects. We could probably do a pratical project during
       this last year to see the connection between all of the
       topics.
       (This curriculum would not be so different from the one I
       had in school, apart from switching some topics between 8
       and 9 and the practical focus in grade 12, however in all
       years the aim should be to show the connections between the
       subjects rather than teaching them seperately)
       [89]Reply ↓

            said:
            “focus on the connections between topics rather than
            teaching them seperately”
            Yes, this is exactly the basic role of math: a common
            language. I think the most important guiding principle
            in designing a curriculum is not what society wants or
            expects from the kids, not what is considered
            important or exciting to the adult world, but what
            kids are capable of enjoying and comprehending, and
            what they are curious about.
            If you say, this condition very much depends on the
            individual student and the place, you are correct, and
            this is why a general curriculum for the whole US
            makes little sense. Teachers need their autonomy back
            more than any guidance about what to teach.
            [92]Reply ↓
   14. ac pool on [93]November 17, 2016 at 7:48 am said:
       This plan leaves financial education to the 11th grade.
       This is too late. It needs to be moved earlier, say 8th
       grade, to reach as many students and as many households as
       possible. The students that will drop out need financial
       education more than the students who reach the 12th grade.
       Putting financial education/information into homes that are
       prone to have drop outs may benefit the whole family.
       [94]Reply ↓

            said:
            “This plan leaves financial education to the 11th
            grade. This is too late.”
            But I thought the post was about math education…
            [97]Reply ↓
               o ac pool on [98]November 17, 2016 at 2:22 pm said:
                 Read proposal # 1.
                 [99]Reply ↓
                      at 4:44 pm said:
                      I read it, and I don’t see it as a math
                      curriculum. It’s an applications of math
                      curriculum. Those who prefer the
                      applications of math curriculum over math
                      seem to think that it’s always preferable to
                      talk about 6 apples, and don’t like to talk
                      about just the number 6.
                      It of course is interesting to be able to
                      talk about, say, compounded interest. But in
                      a math curriculum, its interest is
                      secondary; it’s more important to learn that
                      that the same math can be used to handle
                      radioactive decay, age of ancient artifacts,
                      population increase, spread of diseases,
                      seed arrangements in a sunflower.
                      The math is much simpler than these, and
                      hence it is worthwhile to explore it on its
                      own.
   15. b51015 on [102]November 18, 2016 at 10:23 am said:
       All 4 sound awesome.
       You should add a comparison of the 4 to the end of each:-)
       b51015 (20)
       [103]Reply ↓
   16. [104]Tye Files on [105]November 19, 2016 at 4:06 pm said:
       You are one of my favorite bloggers
       [106]Reply ↓
   17. [107]Tye Files on [108]November 19, 2016 at 4:07 pm said:
       Reblogged this on [109]Butterflies & Machineguns and
       commented:
       Another post by one of my favorite blogs
       [110]Reply ↓
   18. [111]James Doss-Gollin (@JamesDossGollin) on [112]November
       22, 2016 at 6:48 am said:
       Excellent! I would definitely have preferred this
       curriculum as a high school student, and I think connecting
       to the real world would have avoided turning a lot of
       people off of math. Just one small adjustment: skip the
       p-value on the data analysis.
       I defer to American Statistical Association as to why:
       pdf
       [114]Reply ↓
   19. Pingback: [115]Carnival of Mathematics 140 –
       mathematicsandcoding
   20. [116]John Lewis on [117]December 6, 2016 at 7:47 am said:
       Thank you for the income statement, it is very important
       information for me.
       [118]Reply ↓
   21. [119]teacherscoutmom on [120]December 7, 2016 at 12:15 am
       said:
       Love the curriculum layout and especially the choices for
       11th & 12th grade. Streamlining it with their interests is
       amazing!
       [121]Reply ↓
   22. [122]gregsdennis on [123]March 30, 2017 at 12:16 am said:
       I’m 36. Can I take all of these courses?
       [124]Reply ↓



