Recommended for You

    1. [25]Google Sprinkles AI on Its Spreadsheets to Automate
       Away Some Office Work
    2. [26]Secret Algorithms Threaten the Rule of Law
    3. [27]Experts Predict When Artificial Intelligence Will
       Exceed Human Performance
    4. [28]Trump Misused MIT Research in Reasons for Ditching
       Climate Deal
    5. [29]You Don’t Have to Major in Computer Science to Do It as
       a Career


   But the ability to analyze huge data sets of images using
   machine-vision algorithms is changing that. Suddenly it has
   become possible to study color and the way it is used in
   entirely different ways. For example, it is now easy to extract
   combinations of colors from one picture and paste them onto
   another.

   But this process of color pasting is a blunt tool. It can
   replace one set of colors with another but it cannot compare
   these color palettes, decide how specific colors should be
   matched, or discover whether a palette is missing a color and
   replace it.

   The problem is that there is no way of placing colors in order.
   And that makes it hard to compare palettes. So image
   specialists would dearly love to have a natural way to order
   colors extracted from images and so be able to compare them.

   Enter Huy Phan at the Technical University of Denmark in
   Copenhagen and a couple of pals, who have found a way to do
   just that. Their technique is straightforward to implement and
   immediately leads to a new generation of enriched image filters
   that are far more flexible than those currently available.

   The basic problem is simple to state: given the color palette
   from two images, what order should the colors appear in to make
   a meaningful comparison? By meaningful, the team means that
   colors describing the same objects should be comparable.

   Phan and co tackle this as a kind of sorting problem. They
   first assess an image by plotting the position of the colors it
   contains—its palette—in a three-dimensional color “space”
   (every color can be thought of as a three-vector describing how
   it is composed from a mixture of red, green, and blue, for
   example).

   They then measure the distance between each pair of colors in
   the palette. Finally, they use an algorithm to work out how to
   map one palette onto another with minimal
   distortion. Effectively, this algorithm finds clusters within
   each palette’s color space.

   The data set they use is important. “We consider color palettes
   extracted from fine art collections, which we believe to be an
   abundant source of stylistic and unique color themes,” say Phan
   and co.

   That also limits the subject matter, which is crucial. Henri
   Matisse often used deep reds and greens in his paintings, for
   example, while Maximilien Luce used strong blues and yellows to
   shade objects. But because these artists use broadly similar
   scenes (for example, divided into sky and land), the colors are
   comparable.

   It means that the team can assume that similar clusters of
   colors describe similar objects. The algorithm then maps these
   clusters onto each other. In that way, it can take the coloring
   of sky in one image and apply the same set of colors to the sky
   in another image.

   And because the transformation is applied to the whole space,
   it becomes straightforward to map any color from palette onto a
   corresponding color in the other palette.

   That leads to a natural way to order colors. Phan and co do it
   by first specifying the number of colors that appear in each
   cluster. Phan and co use five as their standard example (higher
   numbers require significantly more computational resources).

   The algorithm then finds the five colors in the first cluster,
   then in the second, third and so on. Ordering these clusters
   then allows the palettes in each image to be easily compared.

   The method immediately leads to some interesting applications.
   For example, they create an application called Photo-style
   Explorer which acts like an Instagram filter but in a
   continuous color space. “Instead of choosing among a few
   predefined themes, one can freely surf a continuous space of
   possible photo colorizations to pick a preferred theme,” they
   say.

   Another option is to recolor photos with different palettes in
   different parts of the image. So it is possible to use one
   palette to recolor the sky and another to recolor trees.

   It also allows a better analysis of the color signatures of
   artists and for these signatures to be transferred to other
   images. So it becomes possible to quickly recolor a photograph
   using the Renoir’s color palette or Vincent van Gogh’s.

   That’s interesting work which expands the way color can be used
   in modern images.

   Ordering Color Palettes for Interpolation and Prediction


   Become an MIT Technology Review Insider for in-depth analysis
   and unparalleled perspective.
   [31]Subscribe today
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)


   Emerging Technology from the arXiv

   [32]Emerging Technology from the arXiv Contributor


   Emerging Technology from the arXiv covers the latest ideas and
   technologies that appear on the Physics arXiv preprint server.
   It is part of the Physics arXiv Blog. Email:… [33]More
   [34]KentuckyFC@arxivblog.com
   [35]Subscribe to the Physics arXiv Blog RSS Feed.

     [34] mailto:KentuckyFC@arxivblog.com

   Subscribe to Continue Reading


