Hidden Figures

   Women's studies meets mathematics in a new book arguing for a
   more inclusive cultural notion of numeracy.

By

   [63]Colleen Flaherty
   March 1, 2017
   [64]Comments


   Few disciplines are as polarizing as math. Everyone seems to
   have an opinion about it, and those opinions usually veer
   toward love or hate. A new book argues that part of the problem
   is how we learn to see math and the people who excel at it:
   typically male, white and relentlessly objective. [65]Inventing
   the Mathematician: Gender, Race and Our Cultural Understanding
   of Mathematics (State University of New York Press) might well
   also have been called “Reinventing the Mathematician,” because
   its ultimate goal is to deconstruct our individual and cultural
   ideas about math -- then build them back up again in a more
   inclusive fashion.


   Author Sara N. Hottinger, interim dean of arts and humanities
   and a professor of women’s and gender studies at Keene State
   College, examines mathematical history, math textbooks,
   portraits of noted mathematicians and the interdisciplinary
   field of ethnomathematics in her quest to prove that we are all
   mathematical “subjects.” Her approach is scholarly but also
   informed by an unusual (but in some ways common) personal
   story: she considered becoming a mathematician before
   ultimately pursing a career in women’s studies. The result is a
   highly readable book that might just change math haters’ minds
   about math (and, perhaps, make some math lovers more open to
   critical approaches to the field).

   "Everyone can do mathematics," Hottinger said in an email
   interview. "You may need to work really hard at it and try
   multiple times before you understand. It may come easier to
   some of us, but all of us can eventually succeed."

   Q: You narrowly missed a career as a mathematician, becoming a
   gender studies scholar instead. Can you share a little bit
   about your journey through both disciplines, and why you ended
   up studying gender in graduate school, as opposed to math?

   A: I earned a bachelor’s degree in mathematics and women's
   studies, graduating with honors in both fields. My major in
   women's studies was self-designed, because my undergraduate
   institution, at the time, did not offer a women's studies
   major. The classes I took in women's studies had a profound
   impact on me. Reading feminist scholarship empowered me; it
   changed the way I understood the world and my place in the
   world. During my senior year, I made the choice to pursue a
   doctorate in women's studies, rather than mathematics. I
   distinctly remember thinking that if I became a professor of
   women's studies, I could share that sense of empowerment with
   my students.

   It is important to acknowledge the agency behind the choices I
   made. It is also important to study the ways in which the
   choices we make are shaped, in part, by the culture we live in.
   That is what my book attempts to do. I made the choice to
   pursue a career as a women's studies professor for very real
   and powerful reasons. But I also remember other, smaller
   choices that led me away from a career as a mathematician.
   During my junior year, my math adviser encouraged me to apply
   to the Budapest Semester in Mathematics, a prestigious study
   abroad opportunity to learn mathematics from leading Hungarian
   mathematicians. I looked into the program and decided not to
   apply; I did not think I would be accepted. During my senior
   year, I worried that I would not pass the subject Graduate
   Record Examination in mathematics and, as a result, I chose not
   to apply to graduate programs in mathematics -- despite
   encouragement from my math professors.

   Later, when I read the work of scholars Heather Mendick,
   Melissa Rodd, and Hannah Bartholomew, I found my undergraduate
   experiences mirrored in their interviews with female
   mathematics students.​ … The dominant ways in which we make
   meaning, as a culture, do not allow an understanding of
   femininity to easily coexist alongside an understanding of
   mathematical achievement.

   Q: One might think there's little common ground between gender
   studies and math, but you bridge the canyon, so to speak.
   Still, do you have any regrets about not continuing to study
   mathematics? You note the allure of its simplicity, which is
   hard to come by in other fields.

   A: I love mathematics, and I miss it. When I have time (maybe
   when I retire!), I would love to take more math classes. But I
   would never give up my career as an interdisciplinary women's
   and gender studies professor. I like to ask my upper-level
   students about their feminist aha moment, and I tell them about
   my own moment of revelation: a single book changed my life. I
   was 19, enrolled in my first women’s studies course, and the
   feminist argument in that book radically shifted the way I
   understood myself, the world around me and my place in that
   world. When I chose to pursue a doctoral degree in women’s
   studies, I remembered that aha moment, and I committed to
   creating moments like that for my future students.

   Not only do I love teaching women's studies, but as a women's
   studies scholar, I am free to pursue the kind of
   interdisciplinary projects that interest and sustain me. It was
   in my attempts to articulate my experiences as an undergraduate
   mathematics student and to connect my mathematics education
   with feminist theory that the seeds of my current
   interdisciplinary intellectual work were planted. During my
   senior year of college, I did an independent study on
   psychoanalytic theorist and philosopher Jacques Lacan and ended
   up writing my final paper on the connections between
   mathematical topology and Lacanian theory. I wrote my women’s
   studies senior thesis on feminist pedagogies in the mathematics
   classroom and the ways in which feminist approaches to the
   teaching of math allowed marginalized students to understand
   and work with mathematical knowledge in innovative new ways.

   I continued this work in my doctoral dissertation, where I made
   the epistemological argument that mathematical ways of knowing
   are shaped within communities, using a series of historical
   case studies to support my argument. And, now, in this book, I
   consider the cultural construction of mathematical subjectivity
   and argue that mathematics plays a significant role in the
   construction of normative Western subjectivity and in the
   constitution of the West itself.

   Q: Even smart people (e.g., [66]Larry Summers) seem to believe
   that women are inherently worse at quantitative fields than
   men. Why does this myth, if in fact it is a myth, persist?


   A: In my book, I trace the relationship between the
   construction of mathematical subjectivity and the much broader
   construction of the subject in Western culture and of the West
   itself. Mathematics is central to our cultural self-conception,
   and this becomes clear in the various ways we talk about
   mathematics, in the stories we tell about the field. These
   stories both underlie and work to reproduce the discursive
   construction of the normative subject in Western culture. This
   intimate relationship between mathematical subjectivity and
   normative Western subjectivity is why many educators understand
   achievement in mathematics to be a “gateway” to success in the
   world. It is also why we, as a culture, have an investment in
   limiting who can be successful in mathematics. If we maintain a
   myth that only certain groups can be successful at mathematics,
   then, as a culture, we also limit access to full subjectivity
   to people in those groups.

   Q: What is the stereotype or common portrait of the
   mathematician? And why is math incompatible with notions of
   femininity?

   A: Although many mathematicians will acknowledge that this is
   not at all how they work, mathematics is conceived in our
   culture to be an individual cognitive activity, where the
   mathematician, working in isolation, discovers a mathematical
   theorem using logical, rule-based reasoning to develop and
   modify the work of those who came before him. Many feminist
   theorists have argued that a close association exists between
   masculinity and reason, whereby those traits that are
   considered central to the activity of reasoning -- logic,
   neutrality, a lack of emotional connection and a separation
   between the knower and the object of knowledge -- are also
   stereotypical traits of masculinity. Thus, reason can only be
   achieved by denying those traits which are stereotypically
   considered feminine -- empathy, creativity, intuition,
   embodiment and connection. Yet to reason well is an achievement
   that defines what it means to be human, to be a subject in
   Western culture. Thus we have a very difficult time reconciling
   the ability to reason, which is a central component in the
   construction of subjectivity, with our understanding of
   femininity.

   Because mathematics is understood to be the ultimate
   manifestation of the human ability to reason, mathematical
   achievement is a clear marker in the construction of an ideal
   subjectivity. If these multiple associations -- between reason,
   masculinity, subjectivity and mathematics -- are teased apart,
   we can better understand why mathematical subjectivity and the
   ability to succeed in mathematics is so difficult to achieve
   for those in marginalized groups. For example, if mathematical
   subjectivity and the ability to reason is constructed within
   Western culture as masculine, then women will continue to find
   it difficult to see themselves as mathematical subjects. Women
   will have to choose between being good mathematicians or being
   "proper" women. A number of studies have shown that this is,
   indeed, the position that many girls and women in mathematics
   find themselves.

   Q: What are the cultural and disciplinary consequences of such
   a myth -- perhaps more aptly what you call "normative
   mathematical subjectivity" -- especially on historically
   marginalized groups?

   A: If mathematical subjectivity is constructed in ways that
   prevent women from seeing themselves as mathematical subjects,
   then we also limit the ability of women to see themselves as
   full subjects in the broader sense, as well. This is true for
   people of color, as well. In one of his recent publications,
   David Stinson’s research on the ways in which African-American
   students must negotiate what he calls the “white male math
   myth” demonstrate that for African-American students there are
   a series of cultural discourses that work to limit who can
   understand themselves as mathematical knowers.

   Erica Walker also makes a powerful argument that mathematical
   identity needs to be reconciled with ethnic, gender or other
   identities and that students of color, for example, have to
   sometimes compromise their ethnic identity in order to fully
   embrace their academic identity. In much the same way that
   feminist education scholars have shown, via discourse analysis,
   the incompatibility between femininity and mathematical
   achievement, both Walker and Stinson show the complex ways
   successful black mathematics students must accommodate,
   reconfigure or resist the discursive construction of a
   normative white, masculine mathematical subjectivity. By
   limiting access to mathematical subjectivity in this way, we
   also limit access to Western subjectivity.

   Q: What can teachers of math do to cast off cultural baggage
   surrounding math and gender?

   A: I would argue that teachers of mathematics are doing quite a
   bit already to ensure that girls are succeeding in mathematics.
   Recent research shows that girls’ achievements in mathematics
   stay on par with boys through secondary school. There remains,
   however, a significant disparity between young men and young
   women’s participation and success in mathematics at the
   postsecondary level, leading to what many now call the leaky
   mathematics pipeline. Young women start dropping out of
   mathematics during their undergraduate and graduate education.

   I argue in my book that we need to expand our focus beyond the
   classroom and consider the wider cultural discourses that shape
   our relationship to mathematics. One of the first narratives
   about mathematics that needs to shift is the one that says only
   some people can be successful at mathematics. Think about the
   fact that it is perfectly acceptable for people to say things
   like, "I just can't do math." Such claims then serve as
   justification for poor performance in mathematics and the
   eventual decision to stop taking math classes altogether. We
   would never accept an equivalent claim about reading, right?
   Our assumption is that every child can read. Some may have to
   work harder at it, but eventually everyone should be able to
   read. We need to start making the same assumptions about
   mathematics.

   I would also love to see more representations in our wider
   culture of women and people of color working at and succeeding
   in mathematics. The phenomenal success of the film Hidden
   Figures is a testament to the power of such representations.
   But what Hidden Figures also teaches us is that we need to
   expand our understanding of the history of mathematics. Right
   now our histories of mathematics center around a narrative of
   discovery. Only those mathematicians who made a great
   mathematical discovery or advanced knowledge within the field
   are counted in those histories. Telling histories of
   mathematics in that way discounts the many, many women and men
   who advanced mathematics through excellent, innovative
   teaching, through translating complex mathematical texts, or
   through the kind of hard, daily mathematical labor we see
   represented in the movie. We need more varied stories in our
   culture of what it means to be successful as mathematical
   knowers and practitioners.

   Q: You have two daughters. How do you approach math at home?

   A: I have tried to focus as much, if not more so, on numeracy,
   as I have on literacy. When they were younger, I played number
   games with my girls and tried to cultivate their interest in
   working with patterns and problem solving. When my older
   daughter started school, I started talking about how much
   practice is needed to succeed in mathematics. When she started
   working on a new concept in mathematics and was having
   difficulty, I told her that the struggle she experienced was
   normal and expected. And I told her to keep struggling, that
   when she has struggled enough, understanding will come.

   Because that narrative has been central to how we talk about
   mathematics, she is rarely frustrated by new mathematical
   concepts these days. She will occasionally ask for an
   explanation, but I more commonly get a request for more
   practice problems. She knows now that if she just practices a
   little bit more, then she will succeed. And I do, of course,
   have a lot of books and stories and images of women who have
   been successful at mathematics. The importance of having role
   models cannot be discounted.


