Pages




Tuesday, December 13, 2016

You can find the secret to doing mathematics in a tubeless bicycle
tire

                        [7][CountryView.jpg]
     The author climbing the locally-notorious Country View Road
                     just south of San Jose, CA


   As regular readers may know, one of my consuming passions in
   life besides mathematics is cycling. Living in California,
   where serious winters were wisely banned many years ago, on any
   weekend throughout the year you are likely to find me out on a
   road- or a mountain bike.
   Being also a lover of well-designed technology, I long ago
   switched to using tubeless tires on my road bike. Actually,
   it’s bikes, in the plural—my road bikes number four, all with
   different riding conditions in mind, but all having in common
   the same kind of ultra- narrow saddle that non-cyclists think
   must be excruciatingly painful, but is in fact engineered to be
   the only thing comfortable enough to sit on for many hours at a
   stretch. [Keep going; I am working my way to making a
   mathematical point. In fact, I am heading towards THE most
   significant mathematical point of all: What is the secret to
   doing math?]
   Road tubeless tires have several advantages over the more
   common type of tire, which requires an airtight innertube. One
   advantage is that you need inflate them only to 80 pounds per
   square inch, as opposed to the 110 psi or more for a tubed
   tire, which provides even more comfort over those many hours in
   the saddle.
   You need tire pressures 3 or more times that of a car tire
   because of the extremely low volume in a road-bike tire, which
   sits on a 700 cm diameter wheel with a rim whose width is
   between 21 mm and 25 mm. It is that high pressure that made the
   manufacture of tubeless wheels and tires for bicycles such a
   significant challenge. How can you ensure an almost totally
   airtight fit when the tire is inflated, and it still be
   possible for an average person to remove and mount a deflated
   tire with their bare hands. (Tire levers can easily damage
   tubeless wheels and tires.) We are almost to the secret to
   doing math. Hang in there.

                      [8][Tubeless_Rims.png]
    Clever design: Tubeless rims and tires on a road bike wheel.


   The airtight fit is possible precisely because of that
   relatively high pressure inside the tire—80 psi is over five
   times the air pressure outside the tire. (An automobile tire is
   inflated to roughly twice atmospheric pressure, much lower.)
   The cross-sectional photo on the left shows how a tubeless tire
   has a squared-off ridge that fits into a matching notch in the
   rim. The more air pressure there is in the tire, the tighter
   that ridge binds to the rim, increasing the air seal.
   The problem is, as I mentioned, getting the tire on and off the
   rim. The tire ridge that fits into the rim-notch has a steel
   wire running through it, and its squared-off shape is designed
   to make it difficult for the tire to separate from the
   rim—that, after all, is the point. To solve the
   mounting/removal problem, the wheel has a channel in the
   middle, as shown more clearly in the photo on the right.
   To mount the tire, you push the two tire-rims into that
   channel, one after the other. By the formula for the
   circumference of a circle, when a tire rim is in that center
   channel, you have just over 3 times the depth of the channel of
   superfluous tire length to play with, roughly 12mm of tire
   looseness. The idea is to use that “looseness” to work your way
   around the wheel, pushing (actually rolling) first one tire
   edge over the wheel rim and into the channel, then the other.
   Once the tire is seated on the rim, inflating it with a hand
   pump forces the tire rims out of the channel into the notches.
   To remove the tire after it is deflated, you push the two tire
   rims into the channel and reverse the process.
   That, at least, is the theory. Putting theory into practice
   turns out to be quite a challenge. When I first started to use
   road tubeless tires, several years ago, I read several online
   manuals and watched a number of YouTube videos demonstrating
   how to do it, and could never do it. I usually ended up taking
   the wheel and tire to my local bike shop, where the mechanic
   would do it for me with seeming ease before my eyes. “Fifteen
   dollars, please.”
   But what would happen if I had a flat on one of the remote
   rides I regularly do in the mountains that surround Silicon
   Valley, where I live? One major advantage of tubeless tires is
   that, even if they puncture, usually the air leaks out only
   very slowly, and can generally be stopped by inflating the tire
   from a small pressure-can of air and liquid latex you carry in
   your back pocket, which seals the hole. Which is how I was
   always able to get to a bike shop where someone else could
   solve the problem for me. But a major puncture in the remote,
   with no cell phone access, could leave me dangerously stranded.
   Clearly, I had to learn how to do it myself.
   From now on, when I say “change a tubeless tire”, you can
   interpret it as “do mathematics”. The secret is coming up.
   Moreover, it is coming with a moral that those of us in
   mathematics education ignore at our students’ peril.
   What I find cool is that, for me I somehow stumbled on the
   secret to doing math fairly early in life, before math had
   become such a problem that I felt I could never do it. But
   taking up cycling later in life, when I had a fully developed
   set of metacognitive skills, I approached the problem of
   changing a tubeless tire in much the same way as many
   people—including, I suspect, the mechanics in my local bicycle
   shop—see math. Namely, people like me (and that smart kid
   sitting in the front row in the school math class) make doing
   math look effortless, but many people feel they could never
   master it in a million years.
   Nothing, surely, can look less requiring of skill or expertise
   than putting a tire on a bicycle wheel. (This is why I think
   this is such a great example.) Surely, you just need to read an
   instruction manual, or perhaps have someone demonstrate to you.
   But no matter how many times I read the instructions, no matter
   how many times I viewed—and re-viewed—those how-to YouTube
   videos, and no matter how many times I stood alongside the bike
   shop mechanic and watched as he quickly and effortlessly put
   the tire onto the wheel, I could never do it.
   Just think about that for a moment. For some tasks, instruction
   (on its own) just does not work. Not even for the seemingly
   simple task of changing a bicycle tire. And yet we think that
   forcing kids to sit in the math class while we force-feed
   instruction will result in their being able to do math! Dream
   on.
   What does work, in fact what is absolutely necessary, both for
   changing tubeless tires and doing math, is that the learner has
   to learn to see things the way the expert does. And, since
   instruction does not work, that key step has to be made by the
   learner. All that a good teacher can do, then, is find a way to
   help the learner make that key leap. [That short initial word
   “all” belies the human expertise required to do this.]
   Clearly, when I was, yet again, standing in the bicycle repair
   shop, watching the mechanic change my tire, what he was
   doing—more precisely, what he was experiencing—was very
   different from what I was doing and experiencing when I tried
   and failed. What was I not getting?
   My big breakthrough finally came the one time when the
   mechanic, holding the wheel horizontally pressed to his
   stomach, while manipulating the tire with both hands, told me
   what he was really doing. “You have to think of the tire as
   alive,” he said. “It wants to be sitting firmly on the rim”
   [that, after all, is what it was—expensively—designed for],
   “but it is not very disciplined. It’s like a small child. It
   moves around and resists your attempts to force it. You have to
   understand it, and be aware, through your hands, of what it is
   doing. Work with it—be constantly aware of what it is trying to
   do—so you both get what you want: the tire gets onto the wheel,
   where it belongs, and you can inflate it and get back on your
   bike (where you want to be).”
   Fanciful? Maybe. But it worked. And it continues to work. As a
   result, not only can I now change my tubeless tires, it has for
   me become “mindless and automatic,” as effortless (to me) as
   Picasso drawing a simple doodle on a restaurant napkin to pay
   the bill for his meal was to him. (I thought that if you got
   this far, you deserved a second example with greater cultural
   overtones.)
   It took many years for Picasso to learn to draw the way he did
   (and for the marketplace to assign high value to his work), but
   that does not mean his work was not skillful; rather, he simply
   routinized part of it. When I watch a film of him at work, I
   see superficially how he created, and it looks routine and
   effortless, but I do not see his canvas as he did, and I could
   not draw as he did.
   Likewise, my skill in fitting a tubeless tire, now effortless
   and automatic, is a result of my now seeing and understanding
   what earlier had been opaque.
   I admit that it is far easier to learn to mount a tubeless tire
   on a road bike wheel than to draw like Picasso. But I am less
   sure the difference is so great between changing a tubeless
   tire and being able to solve any one particular kind of math
   problem. Still, no matter how great the difference in the
   degree of skill required, it is possible to learn from the
   analogy.
   Given what I have said here, will reading this essay mean you
   can go out and immediately be able to change a tubeless tire?
   Have I just made a case for instruction working after all? It’s
   possible—for changing bicycle tires, but surely not for
   painting like Picasso. Instruction can and does work, and it is
   an important part of learning. But my guess is you would find
   my words are not enough. I think that the reason that one piece
   of bike-shop instruction was so instantly transformative for me
   was that I had spent an aggregate of many hours struggling to
   change my tire and failing. I had reached a stage where the
   effective key was to get inside the mind of an expert. But the
   ground had to be prepared for that simple revelation to work.
   In education, as in so many parts of life, there are no silver
   bullets. But given enough of the right preparation—enough
   experience acquired through repeated trying and failing—an
   ordinary lead bullet will do the job.
   ----
   This month’s column is loosely adapted from a passage of my
   forthcoming book [9]Finding Fibonacci: The Quest to Rediscover
   the Forgotten Mathematical Genius Who Changed the World, due
   out in March.
   Posted by [10]Mathematical Association of America at [11]4:14
   PM
   [12]Email This[13]BlogThis![14]Share to Twitter[15]Share to
   Facebook[16]Share to Pinterest



