Experiments with point-of-view video cameras

   [15]February 21, 2016February 29, 2016 [16]Darryl Yong


   I’ve been playing around with using multiple cameras to capture
   my classroom this semester. I’m using more than one camera so
   that I can capture what’s happening in the class as a whole and
   also what’s happening as I interact with different groups of
   students. I want to be able to capture video from my point of
   view for several reasons: (1) I want to record (approximately)
   what I was seeing and noticing so as to help uncover the
   signals that led me to decide to intervene with a particular
   group of students or not; (2) I want to record the kinds of
   questions that students are asking and how I responded to
   them–is there something that I could have said that would have
   helped them more? (3) I want to be able to capture the way
   students and I talk to each other–what did I position myself
   relative to them (crouching down, or bending down to talk to
   them) and did it make any difference in their body language or
   response to me?

   Here’s a sample still from a produced video. You can see four
   students sitting together in a group of four. (Ideally, you
   would be able to clearly make out what is on their paper.) In
   the corner is a wide-angle view of several groups.

   [17]pic-in-pic


   Here’s my current setup:

   1) [18]Swivl camera base with my Nexus 5X phone as a recording
   source
   2) [19]GoPro Hero4 Silver mounted on my chest with a Sony
   ECMCS3 microphone.


   Good points: both cameras capture at full HD (1920×1080)
   resolution, and the microphones are by and large capturing
   important conversations. The video is giving me lots of things
   to look at.

   However, I’ve been plagued by lots of (mostly technical)
   problems. I have been trying for weeks but I still haven’t
   found a good method for capturing the video reliably.

   Problems encountered so far
       down to talk to students, then I just get a shot of the
       floor or table. I need to constantly remember that I have
       to position my torso so I get a good view of students’ work
       and faces.
       sight to track you because it uses IR. It has a remote
       control that I wear on a lanyard that it uses to track
       where I move so it should theoretically always have me in
       the shot, but I’m not in the shot half the time. The only
       solution I’ve found so far is to stick it up higher above
       students and have it tilted down slightly.
       “highlight” moments using a remote control that I wear on
       my wrist. I haven’t figured out how to export those markers
       in a useful way. (I experimented with the “video loop”
       recording mode, but that isn’t really helpful because you
       only get 5 minute segments.)
       using [20]ffmpeg vidstab to stabilize the video, but it
       takes hours to process the footage.

       have to watch another video to figure out how to do
       something (that I think should be) simple I am going to
       scream! I’m also behind one version (CS6 instead of CC) and
       this older version doesn’t have the nifty feature of
       aligning two clips of video automatically based on the
       audio tracks.
       general. Even moving video files between devices is slow.
       (Protip: [DEL: Instead of plugging the GoPro into the
       computer using a USB cable, take out the SDHC card and
       stick it in the USB adapter and plug in directly to the
       computer. Waaay faster. :DEL] Whoa.. And about 10x faster
       than that is to put the MicroSDHC card into a SDcard
       adapter, then put it into a SDcard slot in your computer. I
       get about 42MB/s transfer rate that way on my computer.)
       set the encoding compression too low, the video ends up
       being huge (15GB). If I set the encoding compression too
       high, then I can’t make out what is on students’ papers.
       up into smaller files to avoid 4GB file size limit. That
       also adds more complications to video processing. On my
       Nexus 5X, I think it skips a few seconds of video when it
       transitions from one file to another while recording.

   [21]2016-02-22


   This is a work-in-progress post. I hope to have more technical
   issues sorted out soon.


