Publishing Research with Undergraduate Co-authors

   Posted on [16]12/23/2016 by [17]Dagan Karp


   This is a guest post from [18]Ursula Whitcher, Associate Editor
   at [19]Mathematical Reviews.


   One of the highlights of the Joint Math Meetings every January
   is the [20]undergraduate student poster session, where hundreds
   of students present original research projects. Have you
   mentored undergraduate research? Are you working on a paper
   based on your results? If so, where will you submit it?


   If the paper is solely authored by your research students,
   there are many options. The Center for Undergraduate Research
   in Mathematics maintains a nice [21]list of venues for
   undergraduate math research. However, many of us choose to
   co-author papers with our students. Why might you do this?
   Maybe you want the paper to be listed on your CV, or featured
   in a portfolio for promotion or tenure. Maybe you spent the
   summer focused on making conjectures and proving results, and
   want to write up the details in the fall and winter;
   undergraduates may not be able to devote time to the publishing
   process during the academic year, especially if they are
   seniors, or don’t attend your institution. You may have worked
   with several students or teams of students over a period of a
   few years, and not have a single student to tap as lead author.
   You might need to include disciplinary context based on
   postgraduate-level material. Or perhaps you simply have
   multiple collaborators, and they’re not all undergraduates.


   Some undergraduate research journals do accept papers with
   faculty authors. If you’re considering journals of this type,
   [22]Involve is a natural starting point. This is an excellent
   journal, with an editorial board comprising many prominent
   mathematicians and experts in mentoring research. At least one
   third of the authors of a paper submitted to Involve should be
   undergraduate students. The [23]Pi Mu Epsilon Journal also
   considers papers by faculty members, if they are accessible to
   an undergraduate readership.


   But where else could you send your paper? It’s always a good
   idea to have several venues in mind when you begin the
   submissions process. Making a multi-step plan frees you to be
   ambitious in sending your paper to well-known and respected
   journals, without dooming you to despair if the first or second
   place rejects it.

   Of course, you can always send papers with undergraduates to a
   “grown-up” research journal. If you need high-profile
   publications for promotion or tenure, this should be your first
   step! You may already have identified some targets, based on
   past experience or the traditions in your subfield; the
   journals that appear often in your bibliography may also
   provide inspiration. If you just want to look at a big list of
   math journals, various rankings are available. Math Reviews
   computes a “mathematical citation quotient” for every journal
   in its database; you can find [24]list of the top scorers in
   the citation section. (You’ll need to log into MathSciNet to
   view more than the top 10.) Other rankings are collected in
   [25]this MathOverflow post.


   Research with undergraduates often entails computational
   experimentation, gathering evidence that may lead to new
   conjectures. Journals such as [26]Experimental Mathematics
   feature this style of research. You’ll have the most success
   with experimental journals if your methods are interesting in
   their own right; ask yourself whether you have created a new
   algorithm, or surmounted a significant technical obstacle.


   What if your paper has expository elements? If the paper is
   aimed at researchers in your field, you can seek out
   opportunities to submit to refereed conference proceedings,
   which often accept a mix of exposition and original research.
   Ask your colleagues whether they know of a suitable venue:
   though this doesn’t hold in all fields, in mathematics it’s
   often possible to submit to a “conference proceedings” without
   attending the conference. A bonus of proceedings publication
   for your undergraduate collaborators is that their names will
   appear in a hardbound book.

   If your paper has a strong expository element and a broad
   potential readership, consider submitting to a journal whose
   mission is exposition. Don’t expect publication in an
   expository journal to be easier than publication in a
   research-focused journal! You will have multiple referees, some
   from far outside your research area, and you may need to
   rewrite your paper multiple times to make it crystal clear.

   The best-known expository journals are the [27]MAA magazines.
   You’ll likely be choosing between The College Math Journal,
   Mathematics Magazine, and The American Mathematical Monthly.
   Officially, CMJ is focused on the first- and second-year math
   major curriculum, Math Magazine covers all of undergraduate
   mathematics, and The Monthly is aimed at mathematicians of all
   sorts. Because undergraduate research in mathematics usually
   takes junior- and senior-level classroom mathematics as a
   starting point, Math Magazine is often a good venue for papers
   on undergrad research projects. One advantage of publishing in
   MAA magazines is eligibility for [28]MAA prizes.


   What are your favorite places to submit research with
   undergraduates? Please share your ideas in the comments
   section!

   This entry was posted in [29]Journals and Publications.
   Bookmark the [30]permalink.
   [31]← The 2016 SACNAS conference reignited my dreams
   [32]Actively Embracing Mentoring →



