So what is mathematics?

   For starters, it’s important to explore what mathematics
   actually is.

   Mathematician and academic Jo Boaler [66]points out that
   mathematics is the only subject where students and
   mathematicians give very different answers to this question.


   Mathematicians view the subject as an exciting, creative
   endeavour in which problem solving, curiosity, excitement,
   intuition and perseverance play important roles – albeit in
   relation to abstract objects of study.

   For school and even undergraduate mathematics students, these
   aspects of mathematics are often not experienced and remain
   opaque. Students tend to believe that mathematics is a set of
   procedures to be followed. They think only particularly gifted
   people can do and understand these procedures. This suggests
   that the way mathematics is usually taught doesn’t provide
   opportunities for accessing mathematical knowledge. It doesn’t
   allow students to identify with mathematics, nor make them
   aspire to become mathematicians.

   As a result, mathematics has a problem with diversity. All over
   the world, black and women mathematicians remain rare. They
   [67]simply don’t take mathematics at higher academic levels as
   much as their white and male peers.


   One reason for this is given by [68]a study in the US, which
   showed that the more a field attributes success to giftedness
   rather than effort, the fewer female and black academics are in
   that field. This is because the field perpetuates stereotypes
   about who belongs in the field. The same study found that
   mathematics professors hold the most fixed ideas about
   giftedness.


   But this view of giftedness versus effort is not borne out by
   research. A number of scholars [69]have argued that all people
   are capable of learning mathematics, to high levels.


   This suggests that a lot of the “bad press” around mathematics
   as a subject and discipline lies with how it is taught and
   learned.


