RESEARCH

   Hottest year The World Meteorological Organization confirmed on
   21 March that 2016 was the warmest year on record in all major
   data sets that track global surface temperature. The mean
   temperature was 0.06 °C above the previous record, set in 2015,
   calculated from data maintained by the US National Oceanic and
   Atmospheric Administration, NASA and the UK Met Office Hadley
   Centre. The three data sets extend back to at least 1880, but
   differ in the areas they cover. Warming in 2016 was most
   pronounced in data-sparse regions at high northern latitudes.
   The global mean temperature last year was 0.83 °C above the
   1961–90 climate reference period and 0.62 °C above the
   1981–2010 average.

   Five new particles  Five particles have been discovered by the
   LHCb experiment at CERN, Europe’s particle-physics lab near
   Geneva, Switzerland. Found by spotting their decays into
   more-familiar entities, the particles are variations on a known
   particle called Omega-c-zero (Ωc0). Like protons or neutrons,
   Ωc0 contains three quarks, but it is made up of the exotic
   ‘strange’ and ‘charm’ varieties ([51]R. Aaij et al. Preprint at
   heavier, high-energy states of Ωc0, each with a different mass,
   which physicists had anticipated but until now never seen. The
   discovery should help physicists to understand more about how
   quarks bind together.


   Low polar ice This year, both Arctic and Antarctic sea-ice
   levels hit record lows for the month of February, the US
   National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said on
   17 March. As Arctic sea ice approached its maximum annual
   extent, its February average measured 7.6% below the 1981–2010
   average for the month. The Antarctic, around the time of the
   annual maximum melt, saw average ice coverage plummet to 24.4%
   below the February average. Ice in the south is notoriously
   variable; it marked a record high maximum just three years ago.

   Smoking success The World Health Organization’s landmark
   convention on tobacco control, which came into force in 2005
   and committed signatories to introducing anti-smoking policies,
   seems to have driven down smoking worldwide, according to a
   study published on 21 March ([52]S. Gravely et al. Lancet Pub.
   Researchers analysed data from 126 countries, and showed a
   strong association between smoking declines in 2005–15 and the
   implementation of five key measures: tobacco taxes, smoke-free
   policies, warning labels, support for quitting, and advertising
   bans. Every measure implemented was associated with an average
   decrease in smoking prevalence of 1.57 percentage points.



