Share

Comment

   [138]Leave a comment

   A team of researchers at MIT has designed one of the strongest
   lightweight materials known, by compressing and fusing flakes
   of graphene, a two-dimensional form of carbon. The new
   material, a sponge-like configuration with a density of just 5
   percent, can have a strength 10 times that of steel.

   In its two-dimensional form, graphene is thought to be the
   strongest of all known materials. But researchers until now
   have had a hard time translating that two-dimensional strength
   into useful three-dimensional materials.

   The new findings show that the crucial aspect of the new 3-D
   forms has more to do with their unusual geometrical
   configuration than with the material itself, which suggests
   that similar strong, lightweight materials could be made from a
   variety of materials by creating similar geometric features.

   The findings are being reported today in the journal Science
   Advances, in a paper by Markus Buehler, the head of MIT’s
   Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering (CEE) and the
   McAfee Professor of Engineering; Zhao Qin, a CEE research
   scientist; Gang Seob Jung, a graduate student; and Min Jeong
   Kang MEng ’16, a recent graduate.

   IFRAME: [139]//www.youtube.com/embed/VIcZdc42F0g?rel=0


   A team of MIT engineers has successfully designed a new 3-D
   material with five percent the density of steel and ten times
   the strength, making it one of the strongest lightweight
   materials known.

   Video: Melanie Gonick/MIT

   Other groups had suggested the possibility of such lightweight
   structures, but lab experiments so far had failed to match
   predictions, with some results exhibiting several orders of
   magnitude less strength than expected. The MIT team decided to
   solve the mystery by analyzing the material’s behavior down to
   the level of individual atoms within the structure. They were
   able to produce a mathematical framework that very closely
   matches experimental observations.

   Two-dimensional materials — basically flat sheets that are just
   one atom in thickness but can be indefinitely large in the
   other dimensions — have exceptional strength as well as unique
   electrical properties. But because of their extraordinary
   thinness, “they are not very useful for making 3-D materials
   that could be used in vehicles, buildings, or devices,” Buehler
   says. “What we’ve done is to realize the wish of translating
   these 2-D materials into three-dimensional structures.”

   The team was able to compress small flakes of graphene using a
   combination of heat and pressure. This process produced a
   strong, stable structure whose form resembles that of some
   corals and microscopic creatures called diatoms. These shapes,
   which have an enormous surface area in proportion to their
   volume, proved to be remarkably strong. “Once we created these
   3-D structures, we wanted to see what’s the limit — what’s the
   strongest possible material we can produce,” says Qin. To do
   that, they created a variety of 3-D models and then subjected
   them to various tests. In computational simulations, which
   mimic the loading conditions in the tensile and compression
   tests performed in a tensile loading machine, “one of our
   samples has 5 percent the density of steel, but 10 times the
   strength,” Qin says.

   Buehler says that what happens to their 3-D graphene material,
   which is composed of curved surfaces under deformation,
   resembles what would happen with sheets of paper. Paper has
   little strength along its length and width, and can be easily
   crumpled up. But when made into certain shapes, for example
   rolled into a tube, suddenly the strength along the length of
   the tube is much greater and can support substantial weight.
   Similarly, the geometric arrangement of the graphene flakes
   after treatment naturally forms a very strong configuration.

   The new configurations have been made in the lab using a
   high-resolution, multimaterial 3-D printer. They were
   mechanically tested for their tensile and compressive
   properties, and their mechanical response under loading was
   simulated using the team’s theoretical models. The results from
   the experiments and simulations matched accurately.

   The new, more accurate results, based on atomistic
   computational modeling by the MIT team, ruled out a possibility
   proposed previously by other teams: that it might be possible
   to make 3-D graphene structures so lightweight that they would
   actually be lighter than air, and could be used as a durable
   replacement for helium in balloons. The current work shows,
   however, that at such low densities, the material would not
   have sufficient strength and would collapse from the
   surrounding air pressure.

   But many other possible applications of the material could
   eventually be feasible, the researchers say, for uses that
   require a combination of extreme strength and light weight.
   “You could either use the real graphene material or use the
   geometry we discovered with other materials, like polymers or
   metals,” Buehler says, to gain similar advantages of strength
   combined with advantages in cost, processing methods, or other
   material properties (such as transparency or electrical
   conductivity).

   “You can replace the material itself with anything,” Buehler
   says. “The geometry is the dominant factor. It’s something that
   has the potential to transfer to many things.”

   The unusual geometric shapes that graphene naturally forms
   under heat and pressure look something like a Nerf ball —
   round, but full of holes. These shapes, known as gyroids, are
   so complex that “actually making them using conventional
   manufacturing methods is probably impossible,” Buehler says.
   The team used 3-D-printed models of the structure, enlarged to
   thousands of times their natural size, for testing purposes.

   For actual synthesis, the researchers say, one possibility is
   to use the polymer or metal particles as templates, coat them
   with graphene by chemical vapor deposit before heat and
   pressure treatments, and then chemically or physically remove
   the polymer or metal phases to leave 3-D graphene in the gyroid
   form. For this, the computational model given in the current
   study provides a guideline to evaluate the mechanical quality
   of the synthesis output.

   The same geometry could even be applied to large-scale
   structural materials, they suggest. For example, concrete for a
   structure such as a bridge might be made with this porous
   geometry, providing comparable strength with a fraction of the
   weight. This approach would have the additional benefit of
   providing good insulation because of the large amount of
   enclosed airspace within it.

   Because the shape is riddled with very tiny pore spaces, the
   material might also find application in some filtration
   systems, for either water or chemical processing. The
   mathematical descriptions derived by this group could
   facilitate the development of a variety of applications, the
   researchers say.

   “This is an inspiring study on the mechanics of 3-D graphene
   assembly,” says Huajian Gao, a professor of engineering at
   Brown University, who was not involved in this work. “The
   combination of computational modeling with 3-D-printing-based
   experiments used in this paper is a powerful new approach in
   engineering research. It is impressive to see the scaling laws
   initially derived from nanoscale simulations resurface in
   macroscale experiments under the help of 3-D printing,” he
   says.

   This work, Gao says, “shows a promising direction of bringing
   the strength of 2-D materials and the power of material
   architecture design together.”

   The research was supported by the Office of Naval Research, the
   Department of Defense Multidisciplinary University Research
   Initiative, and BASF-North American Center for Research on
   Advanced Materials.
     __________________________________________________________

   Topics: [140]Research, [141]School of Engineering, [142]Civil
   and environmental engineering, [143]Materials Science and
   Engineering, [144]Nanoscience and nanotechnology, [145]Graphene



