Could You Tune Every Key on a Piano to a Middle C?

   Android recently released an ad featuring a "monotuned"
   piano. Do not try this at home.



   Share on Facebook
   Share on Twitter
   Share on Reddit
   Email
   Print
   Share via



   A view inside a grand piano. Credit: [34]David Miaolo, via
   Wikimedia Commons. CC BY-SA 3.0
   Advertisement |
   Report Ad


   In a new [35]Android ad, a pianist plays two pianos. One is a
   normal piano, and one has all the strings tuned to the same
   note, a middle C.




   Naturally, after watching the commercial, I wondered how they
   made the piano do that. According to the “Making of Monotune”
   video embedded above, they modified the innards of the piano to
   change a lot of the string lengths. I respect that it was a
   difficult technical undertaking, but frankly, that’s kind of a
   boring answer. What if they had tried to tune every note on the
   piano to middle C without modifying the strings or inner
   workings of the instrument?

   If you’ve ever peeked inside a grand piano, you’ve seen a mess
   of strings that vary in length and thickness, getting shorter
   and thinner as you go from lower to higher (left to right). The
   pitch of a [37]vibrating string depends on its length, its
   density (which generally corresponds to its thickness), and the
   tension placed on the string. Lengthening or thickening the
   strings lowers the pitch, while increasing the tension raises
   the pitch. The precise formula for the frequency (f) of a note
   on a vibrating string based on length (L), tension (T), and
   density (μ) of the string is shown below.


   In theory, you can tune a string of any length and thickness to
   any pitch by adjusting its tension, so in theory, you can tune
   any string on a piano to any pitch. How much tension would you
   have to apply to do that?

   Pianos from uprights to concert grands all produce the same
   pitches on instruments of vastly different sizes, so there is
   no one standard for the lengths and densities of piano strings.
   But we don’t need to know those quantities at all. We can just
   look at the relationship between frequency and tension and see
   that if we hold length and density constant, the frequency is
   proportional to the square root of the tension.

   A middle C has pretty close to 10 times the frequency of the
   lowest note on a piano, so we would need about 100 times the
   tension to tune the lowest string all the way up. It’s safe to
   say that tuning the string that way would not be good for your
   piano. In all likelihood, the string would break long before
   you tightened it all the way. If somehow the string managed to
   hold out, it would go from needing [38]around 200 pounds of
   tension to 20,000 pounds, the difference between being able to
   hold a smallish football player and an [39]entire football
   team. The total tension on a piano tops out at around
   [40]45,000 pounds spread over the 88 keys of a Steinway concert
   grand. Concentrating half that tension on just one string would
   probably rip the instrument apart. Never mind the fact that
   many of the other low strings would need almost as much
   tension, so the left side of the piano would have several
   football teams pulling on it.


   On the other side of the keyboard, we’d also have problems
   tuning the highest strings down to a middle C. We wouldn’t risk
   destroying the piano, but there’s a good chance the strings
   would not make a sound. The high C on a piano is 4 octaves
   above a middle C, so its frequency is 16 times the frequency of
   the middle C. That means we’d need to reduce the tension to
   1/256 of the tension it normally has. Based on my experience
   playing a stringed instrument, I don’t think the string would
   make any noise at all with that little tension. It would be
   like trying to strum the fringe on a scarf.

   After running the numbers, I am quite convinced that changing
   the guts of the piano is the right call if you want to tune all
   the keys to the same note. And why would we want to do that
   anyway? The Android ad vividly demonstrates that sacrificing
   all variation in pitch makes music, or at least the third
   movement of Beethoven's Moonlight Sonata, much less rich, but
   it ignores one big advantage: this is [41]one piano that could
   actually be in tune.


   The views expressed are those of the author(s) and are not
   necessarily those of Scientific American.
   [42][rightsPermsIcon.png] Rights & Permissions
   Advertisement |
   Report Ad



