By [35]Gregory Buck


     August 9, 2012


   Gregory Buck on the mathematics of swimwear. Gregory Buck on
   [36]the mathematics of swimwear.


   Like everyone else I know, when I go to the beach I think
   mathematics. Archimedes, my favorite mathematician, did too—his
   perhaps best-known work is the “Sand Reckoner,” wherein he
   counts the grains of sand it would take to fill the universe.
   He must have been at the beach when he thought how to do it.
   I’m not sure Archimedes picked the most interesting thing about
   the beach for analysis, but he might be forgiven—because the
   ancient Greeks didn’t wear swimsuits.

   Swimsuits often remind me of Carl Friedrich Gauss, a superb
   nineteenth-century mathematician who really understood a curved
   surface. He could have told you why you can’t iron most
   suit-tops from a two piece swimsuit. In a geometrical sense,
   curved surfaces, like the surface of a sphere, just don’t lie
   flat—they don’t have enough surface area. (When you are
   finished making guacamole, try flattening the hollowed out
   avocado skin. It will tear.) Many suit-tops are constructed by
   sewing together two petal-shaped sections of flat fabric, just
   the same way you can make the earth by sewing together regions
   bounded by the lines of longitude. Lemon wedges are another
   example. The peel from a lemon wedge will not lie flat. But if
   you pressed it as flat as it would go, outlined it on a piece
   of paper, did the same for all the wedges of that particular
   lemon, cut the regions out, colored them with a yellow
   highlighter, then taped them together along their borders, you
   would have an approximate lemon. The trick for both the
   suit-top and the approximate lemon is that though they are
   constructed of flat sections (fabric and paper are flat), the
   way they are joined together makes the curved surface.

   The job of a swimsuit is to uphold decency while you hang out
   in places where people might, conceivably, swim. We can think
   of this decency, this modesty, as a load or strain the suit
   must bear. Different suit designs solve this problem in
   different ways, though each must take into account the regions
   which must be covered (RMBCs). There has, it’s well known, been
   a considerable decline in the percentage of skin area covered
   by swimsuits over the last hundred years (which has increased
   visual volatility—dramatic swings to both ends of the
   attraction/repulsion spectrum). As the suit becomes smaller and
   smaller, each square inch takes on more and more of the weight
   of propriety.

   The equation here is pretty straightforward. For example, let
   DL represent the total decency load. DL has been declining with
   time, but can be considered fixed during any given beach
   season. Let SA be the surface area of the suit, and SK the
   surface area of the skin. Then if VV is the visual volatility,
   we have:
   equation,jpg.jpg

   The proper mathematical way to look at this is to say that
   since, as the suit shrinks, a finite decency mass is
   concentrated into an ever smaller region, the decency density
   grows larger and larger—growing toward infinity. This point of
   infinite density is called a singularity. So we have that each
   RMBC has an associated singularity. And each beach-goer, on
   each beach, has an associated decency surface, with some number
   of singularities. The first thing a mathematician does, when
   faced with a surface or space with singularities, is, naturally
   enough, count them. A most unusual aspect of this particular
   singularity problem is that the count is culturally
   dependent—in fact there are countries where the sum is less
   than it is in the United States. I have heard that there are
   beaches where a bather’s decency surface might have no
   singularities at all, a prospect I have not the courage to
   consider.

   Perhaps the best way to look at a swimsuit is topologically—an
   approach that makes the beach a bit more egalitarian. The idea
   of topology is that you can deform things—stretch or shrink
   them any which way—but you can’t tear them. To a topologist a
   sphere is the same as a cube, but differs from a bagel because
   a bagel has a hole. We can classify swimsuits topologically by
   counting holes, say like this: assume the suit begins as a
   sphere, and we will cut holes so we can wear it. For example,
   in a two-piece women’s suit, a tube top (a strapless top)
   requires two holes—one for the torso at the bottom, and one at
   the top where the head and both arms emerge. A halter top has
   the torso hole, and one for the neck, and the arms share
   another one for a total of three. A standard top that goes over
   both shoulders (say by straps), has a hole for each arm and the
   neck, and of course the torso, for a total of four. One-piece
   suits are five-holers. Men’s trunks, and the bottoms of
   two-piece suits, have three holes: two legs and the waist. The
   idea is that, say, all tube tops are topologically
   equivalent—they all have the same number of holes. But a tube
   top is not equivalent to a halter top. On another hand, halter
   tops and men’s trunks are topologically equivalent (go ahead,
   try stretching one into the other).

   Now the beach is not always fair to all of us, but topology
   makes it more so. My physical form may fall a bit short of
   ideal, but damn if my suit isn’t topologically equivalent to
   Brad Pitt’s. Surf’s up!

   Read more from our [37]Swimsuit Issue.


   Illustration by Richard McGuire.

      More:




