[10]Azimuth






The Circular Electron Positron Collider

   [13]Chen-Ning Yang is perhaps China’s most famous particle
   physicists. Together with Tsung-Dao Lee, he [14]won the Nobel
   prize in 1957 for discovering that the laws of physics known
   the difference between left and right. He helped create
   [15]Yang–Mills theory: the theory that describes all the forces
   in nature except gravity. He helped find the [16]Yang–Baxter
   equation, which describes what particles do when they move
   around on a thin sheet of matter, tracing out braids.


   Right now the world of particle physics is in a shocked,
   [17]somewhat demoralized state because the Large Hadron
   Collider has not yet found any physics beyond the Standard
   Model. Some Chinese scientists want to forge ahead by building
   an even more powerful, even more expensive accelerator.


   But Yang recently came out against this. This is a big deal,
   because he is very prestigious, and only China has the will to
   pay for the next machine. The director of the Chinese institute
   that wants to build the next machine, Wang Yifeng, issued a
   point-by-point rebuttal of Yang the very next day.

   Over on G+, [18]Willie Wong translated some of Wang’s rebuttal
   in some comments to [19]my post on this subject. The real goal
   of my post here is to make this translation a bit easier to
   find—not because I agree with Wang, but because this discussion
   is important: it affects the future of particle physics.


   First let me set the stage. In 2012, two months after the Large
   Hadron Collider found the Higgs boson, the Institute of High
   Energy Physics proposed a bigger machine: the [20]Circular
   Electron Positron Collider, or CEPC.


   This machine would be a ring 100 kilometers around. It would
   collide electrons and positrons at an energy of 250 GeV, about
   twice what you need to make a Higgs. It could make lots of
   Higgs bosons and study their properties. It might find
   something new, too! Of course that would be the hope.

   It would cost $6 billion, and the plan was that China would pay
   for 70% of it. Nobody knows who would pay for the rest.

   According to [21]Science:


     On 4 September, Yang, in an [22]article posted on the social
     media platform WeChat, says that China should not build a
     supercollider now. He is concerned about the huge cost and
     says the money would be better spent on pressing societal
     needs. In addition, he does not believe the science
     justifies the cost: The LHC confirmed the existence of the
     Higgs boson, he notes, but it has [23]not discovered new
     particles or inconsistencies in the standard model of
     particle physics. The prospect of an even bigger collider
     succeeding where the LHC has failed is “a guess on top of a
     guess,” he writes. Yang argues that high-energy physicists
     should eschew big accelerator projects for now and start
     blazing trails in new experimental and theoretical
     approaches.


     That same day, IHEP’s director, Wang Yifang, posted a
     point-by-point [24]rebuttal on the institute’s public WeChat
     account. He criticized Yang for rehashing arguments he had
     made in the 1970s against building the BECP. “Thanks to
     comrade [Deng] Xiaoping,” who didn’t follow Yang’s advice,
     Wang wrote, “IHEP and the BEPC … have achieved so much
     today.” Wang also noted that the main task of the CEPC would
     not be to find new particles, but to carry out detailed
     studies of the Higgs boson.


     Yang did not respond to request for comment. But some
     scientists contend that the thrust of his criticisms are
     against the CEPC’s anticipated upgrade, the Super
     Proton-Proton Collider (SPPC). “Yang’s objections are
     directed mostly at the SPPC,” says Li Miao, a cosmologist at
     Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, in China, who says he is
     leaning toward supporting the CEPC. That’s because the cost
     Yang cites—$20 billion—is the estimated price tag of both
     the CEPC and the SPPC, Li says, and it is the SPPC that
     would endeavor to make discoveries beyond the standard
     model.

     Still, opposition to the supercollider project is mounting
     outside the high-energy physics community. Cao Zexian, a
     researcher at CAS’s Institute of Physics here, contends that
     Chinese high-energy physicists lack the ability to steer or
     lead research in the field. China also lacks the industrial
     capacity for making advanced scientific instruments, he
     says, which means a supercollider would depend on foreign
     firms for critical components. Luo Huiqian, another
     researcher at the Institute of Physics, says that most big
     science projects in China have suffered from arbitrary cost
     cutting; as a result, the finished product is often a far
     cry from what was proposed. He doubts that the proposed CEPC
     would be built to specifications.

     The state news agency Xinhua has lauded the debate as
     “progress in Chinese science” that will make big science
     decision-making “more transparent.” Some, however, see a
     call for transparency as a bad omen for the CEPC. “It means
     the collider may not receive the go-ahead in the near
     future,” asserts Institute of Physics researcher Wu Baojun.
     Wang acknowledged that possibility in a 7 September
     interview with Caijing magazine: “opposing voices naturally
     have an impact on future approval of the project,” he said.

   Willie Wong’s prefaced his translation of Wang’s rebuttal with
   this:

     Here is a translation of the essential parts of the
     rebuttal; some standard Chinese language disclaimers of
     deference etc are omitted. I tried to make the translation
     as true to the original as possible; the viewpoints
     expressed are not my own.

   Here is the translation:

     Today (September 4) published the article by CN Yang titled
     “China should not build an SSC today”. As a scientist who
     works on the front line of high energy physics and the
     current director of the the high energy physics institute in
     the Chinese Academy of Sciences, I cannot agree with his
     viewpoint.

     (A) The first reason to Dr. Yang’s objection is that a
     supercollider is a bottomless hole. His objection stemmed
     from the American SSC wasting 3 billion US dollars and
     amounted to naught. The LHC cost over 10 billion US dollars.
     Thus the proposed Chinese accelerator cannot cost less than
     20 billion US dollars, with no guaranteed returns. [Ed:
     emphasis original]

     Here, there are actually three problems. The first is “why
     did SSC fail”? The second is “how much would a Chinese
     collider cost?” And the third is “is the estimate reasonable
     and realistic?” Here I address them point by point.

     (1) Why did the American SSC fail? Are all colliders
     bottomless pits?

     The many reasons leading to the failure of the American SSC
     include the government deficit at the time, the fight for
     funding against the International Space Station, the party
     politics of the United States, the regional competition
     between Texas and other states. Additionally there are
     problems with poor management, bad budgeting, ballooning
     construction costs, failure to secure international
     collaboration. See references [2,3] [Ed: consult original
     article for references; items 1-3 are English language]. In
     reality, “exceeding the budget” is definitely not the
     primary reason for the failure of the SSC; rather, the
     failure should be attributed to some special and
     circumstantial reasons, caused mainly by political elements.

     For the US, abandoning the SSC was a very incorrect
     decision. It lost the US the chance for discovering the
     Higgs Boson, as well as the foundations and opportunities
     for future development, and thereby also the leadership
     position that US has occupied internationally in high energy
     physics until then. This definitely had a very negative
     impact on big science initiatives in the US, and caused one
     generation of Americans to lose the courage to dream. The
     reasons given by the American scientific community against
     the SSC are very similar to what we here today against the
     Chinese collider project. But actually the cancellation of
     the SSC did not increase funding to other scientific
     endeavors. Of course, activation of the SSC would not have
     reduced the funding to other scientific endeavors, and many
     people who objected to the project are not regretting it.

     Since then, LHC was constructed in Europe, and achieved
     great success. Even though its construction exceeded its
     original budget, but not by a lot. This shows that
     supercollider projects do not have to be bottomless, and has
     a chance to succeed.

     The Chinese political landscape is entirely different from
     that of the US. In particular, for large scale
     constructions, the political system is superior. China has
     already accomplished to date many tasks which the Americans
     would not, or could not do; many more will happen in the
     future. The failure of SSC doesn’t mean that we cannot do
     it. We should scientifically analyze the situation, and at
     the same time foster international collaboration, and
     properly manage the budget.

     (2) How much would it cost? Our planned collider (using
     circumference of 100 kilometers for computations) will
     proceed in two steps. [Ed: details omitted. The author
     estimated that the electron-positron collider will cost 40
     Billion Yuan, followed by the proton-proton collider which
     will cost 100 billion Yuan, not accounting for inflation.
     With approximately 10 year construction time for each
     phase.] The two-phase planning is to showcase the scientific
     longevity of the project, especially entrainment of other
     technical development (e.g. high energy superconductors),
     and that the second phase [ed: the proton-proton collider]
     is complementary to the scientific and technical
     developments of the first phase. The reason that the second
     phase designs are incorporated in the discussion is to
     prevent the scenario where design elements of the first
     phase inadvertently shuts off possibility of further
     expansion in the second phase.

     (3) Is this estimate realistic? Are we going to go down the
     same road as the American SSC?

     First, note that in the past 50 years , there were many
     successful colliders internationally (LEP, LHC, PEPII,
     KEKB/SuperKEKB etc) and many unsuccessful ones (ISABELLE,
     SSC, FAIR, etc). The failed ones are all proton
     accelerators. All electron colliders have been successful.
     The main reason is that proton accelerators are more
     complicated, and it is harder to correctly estimate the
     costs related to constructing machines beyond the current
     frontiers.

     There are many successful large-scale constructions in
     China. In the 40 years since the founding of the high energy
     physics institute, we’ve built [list of high energy
     experiment facilities, I don’t know all their names in
     English], each costing over 100 million Yuan, and none are
     more than 5% over budget, in terms of actual costs of
     construction, time to completion, meeting milestones. We
     have a well developed expertise in budget, construction, and
     management.

     For the CEPC (electron-positron collider) our estimates
     relied on two methods:

     (i) Summing of the parts: separately estimating costs of
     individual elements and adding them up.

     (ii) Comparisons: using costs for elements derived from
     costs of completed instruments both domestically and abroad.

     At the level of the total cost and at the systems level, the
     two methods should produce cost estimates within 20% of each
     other.

     After completing the initial design [ref. 1], we produced a
     list of more than 1000 required equipments, and based our
     estimates on that list. The estimates are refereed by local
     and international experts.

     For the SPPC (the proton-proton collider; second phase) we
     only used the second method (comparison). This is due to the
     second phase not being the main mission at hand, and we are
     not yet sure whether we should commit to the second phase.
     It is therefore not very meaningful to discuss its potential
     cost right now. We are committed to only building the SPPC
     once we are sure the science and the technology are mature.

     (B) The second reason given by Dr. Yang is that China is
     still a developing country, and there are many
     social-economic problems that should be solved before
     considering a supercollider.

     Any country, especially one as big as China, must consider
     both the immediate and the long-term in its planning. Of
     course social-economic problems need to be solved, and
     indeed solving them is taking currently the lions share of
     our national budget. But we also need to consider the long
     term, including an appropriate amount of expenditures on
     basic research, to enable our continuous development and the
     potential to lead the world. The China at the end of the
     Qing dynasty has a rich populace with the world’s highest
     GDP. But even though the government has the ability to
     purchase armaments, the lack of scientific understanding
     reduced the country to always be on the losing side of wars.

     In the past few hundred years, developments into
     understanding the structure of matter, from molecules,
     atoms, to the nucleus, the elementary particles, all
     contributed and led the scientific developments of their
     era. High energy physics pursue the finest structure of
     matter and its laws, the techniques used cover many
     different fields, from accelerator, detectors, to low
     temperature, superconducting, microwave, high frequency,
     vacuum, electronic, high precision instrumentation,
     automatic controls, computer science and networking, in many
     ways led to the developments in those fields and their broad
     adoption. This is a indicator field in basic science and
     technical developments. Building the supercollider can
     result in China occupying the leadership position in such
     diverse scientific fields for several decades, and also lead
     to the domestic production of many of the important
     scientific and technical instruments. Furthermore, it will
     allow us to attract international intellectual capital, and
     allow the training of thousands of world-leading specialists
     in our institutes. How is this not an urgent need for the
     country?

     In fact, the impression the Chinese government and the
     average Chinese people create for the world at large is a
     populace with lots of money, and also infatuated with money.
     It is hard for a large country to have a international voice
     and influence without significant contribution to the human
     culture. This influence, in turn, affects the benefits China
     receive from other countries. In terms of current GDP, the
     proposed project (including also the phase 2 SPPC) does not
     exceed that of the Beijing positron-electron collider
     completed in the 80s, and is in fact lower than LEP, LHC,
     SSC, and ILC.

     Designing and starting the construction of the next
     supercollider within the next 5 years is a rare opportunity
     to let us achieve a leadership position internationally in
     the field of high energy physics. The newly discovered Higgs
     boson has a relatively low mass, which allows us to probe it
     further using a circular positron-electron collider.
     Furthermore, such colliders has a chance to be modified into
     proton colliders. This facility will have over 5 decades of
     scientific use. Furthermore, currently Europe, US, and Japan
     all already have scientific items on their agenda, and
     within 20 years probably cannot construct similar
     facilities. This gives us an advantage in competitiveness.
     Thirdly, we already have the experience building the Beijing
     positron-electron collider, so such a facility is in our
     strengths. The window of opportunity typically lasts only 10
     years, if we miss it, we don’t know when the next window
     will be. Furthermore, we have extensive experience in
     underground construction, and the Chinese economy is
     currently at a stage of high growth. We have the ability to
     do the constructions and also the scientific need. Therefore
     a supercollider is a very suitable item to consider.

     (C) The third reason given by Dr. Yang is that constructing
     a supercollider necessarily excludes funding other basic
     sciences.

     China currently spends 5% of all R&D budget on basic
     research; internationally 15% is more typical for developed
     countries. As a developing country aiming to joint the ranks
     of developed country, and as a large country, I believe we
     should aim to raise the ratio to 10% gradually and
     eventually to 15%. In terms of numbers, funding for basic
     science has a large potential for growth (around 100 billion
     yuan per annum) without taking away from other basic science
     research.

     On the other hand, where should the increased funding be
     directed? Everyone knows that a large portion of our basic
     science research budgets are spent on purchasing scientific
     instruments, especially from international sources. If we
     evenly distribute the increased funding amount all basic
     science fields, the end results is raising the GDP of US,
     Europe, and Japan. If we instead spend 10 years putting 30
     billion Yuan into accelerator science, more than 90% of the
     money will remain in the country, and improve our technical
     development and market share of domestic companies. This
     will also allow us to raise many new scientists and
     engineers, and greatly improve the state of art in
     domestically produced scientific instruments.

     In addition, putting emphasis into high energy physics will
     only bring us to the normal funding level internationally
     (it is a fact that particle physics and nuclear physics are
     severely underfunded in China). For the purposes of
     developing a world-leading big science project, CEPC is a
     very good candidate. And it does not contradict a desire to
     also develop other basic sciences.

     (D) Dr. Yang’s fourth objection is that both supersymmetry
     and quantum gravity have not been verified, and the
     particles we hope to discover using the new collider will in
     fact be nonexistent.

     That is of course not the goal of collider science. In [ref
     1] which I gave to Dr. Yang myself, we clearly discussed the
     scientific purpose of the instrument. Briefly speaking, the
     standard model is only an effective theory in the low energy
     limit, and a new and deeper theory is need. Even though
     there are some experimental evidence beyond the standard
     model, more data will be needed to indicate the correct
     direction to develop the theory. Of the known problems with
     the standard model, most are related to the Higgs Boson.
     Thus a deeper physical theory should have hints in a better
     understanding of the Higgs boson. CEPC can probe to 1%
     precision [ed. I am not sure what this means] Higgs bosons,
     10 times better than LHC. From this we have the hope to
     correctly identify various properties of the Higgs boson,
     and test whether it in fact matches the standard model. At
     the same time, CEPC has the possibility of measuring the
     self-coupling of the Higgs boson, of understanding the Higgs
     contribution to vacuum phase transition, which is important
     for understanding the early universe. [Ed. in this previous
     sentence, the translations are a bit questionable since some
     HEP jargon is used with which I am not familiar] Therefore,
     regardless of whether LHC has discovered new physics, CEPC
     is necessary.

     If there are new coupling mechanisms for Higgs, new
     associated particles, composite structure for Higgs boson,
     or other differences from the standard model, we can
     continue with the second phase of the proton-proton
     collider, to directly probe the difference. Of course this
     could be due to supersymmetry, but it could also be due to
     other particles. For us experimentalists, while we care
     about theoretical predictions, our experiments are not
     designed only for them. To predict whether a collider can or
     cannot discover a hypothetical particle at this moment in
     time seems premature, and is not the view point of the HEP
     community in general.

     (E) The fifth objection is that in the past 70 years high
     energy physics have not led to tangible improvements to
     humanity, and in the future likely will not.

     In the past 70 years, there are many results from high
     energy physics, which led to techniques common to everyday
     life. [Ed: list of examples include sychrotron radiation,
     free electron laser, scatter neutron source, MRI, PET,
     radiation therapy, touch screens, smart phones, the
     world-wide web. I omit the prose.]

     [Ed. Author proceeds to discuss hypothetical economic
     benefits from
     a) superconductor science
     b) microwave source
     c) cryogenics
     d) electronics
     sort of the usual stuff you see in funding proposals.]

     (F) The sixth reason was that the institute for High Energy
     Physics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences has not produced
     much in the past 30 years. The major scientific
     contributions to the proposed collider will be directed by
     non-Chinese, and so the nobel will also go to a non-Chinese.

     [Ed. I’ll skip this section because it is a
     self-congratulatory pat on one’s back (we actually did
     pretty well for the amount of money invested), a promise to
     promote Chinese participation in the project (in accordance
     to the economic investment), and the required comment that
     “we do science for the sake of science, and not for winning
     the Nobel.”]

     (G) The seventh reason is that the future in HEP is in
     developing a new technique to accelerate particles, and
     developing a geometric theory, not in building large
     accelerators.

     A new method to accelerate particles is definitely an
     important aspect to accelerator science. In the next several
     decades this can prove useful for scattering experiments or
     for applied fields where beam confinement is not essential.
     For high energy colliders, in terms of beam emittance and
     energy efficiency, new acceleration principles have a long
     way to go. During this period, high energy physics cannot be
     simply put on hold. In terms of “geometric theory” or
     “string theory”, these are too far from experimentally
     approachable, and is not a problem we can consider
     currently.

     People disagree on the future of high energy physics.
     Currently there are no Chinese winners of the Nobel prize in
     physics, but there are many internationally. Dr. Yang’s
     viewpoints are clearly out of mainstream. Not just
     currently, but also in the past several decades. Dr. Yang
     has been documented to have held a pessimistic view of
     higher energy physics and its future since the 60s, and
     that’s how he missed out on the discovery of the standard
     model. He is on record as being against Chinese collider
     science since the 70s. It is fortunate that the government
     supported the Institute of High Energy Physics and
     constructed various supporting facilities, leading to our
     current achievements in synchrotron radiation and neutron
     scattering. For the future, we should listen to the younger
     scientists at the forefront of current research, for that’s
     how we can gain international recognition for our scientific
     research.

   It will be very interesting to see how this plays out.


