A Few of My Favorite Spaces: The Connected Sum of Four Hopf Links

   The mathematics of the Olympic rings



   Share on Facebook
   Share on Twitter
   Share on Reddit
   Email
   Print
   Share via



   Credit: [34]Pierre de Coubertin (1863-1937) Wikimedia Public
   Domain
   Advertisement |
   Report Ad


   It’s an internationally recognized symbol of unity, healthy
   competition, athletic prowess, and the [35]excellence of people
   named Simone. But on to the important part: is there anything
   mathematically interesting about the Olympic rings?


   Yes and no. The Olympic rings symbol is a chain of five rings,
   each one attached to one or two neighbors. We’ll take a trip to
   the world of knot theory to figure out how to analyze it
   mathematically.

   A mathematical knot is almost like a knot you would have in
   your shoelace or sailboat rigging, but the loose ends are fused
   together. A circle, then, is a knot, but it’s not a very
   compelling one. It, and anything you can get by jigging it
   around without cutting or gluing, is called the unknot.
   An unknotted binder clip. Image: Evelyn Lamb

   The technical term for an object like the Olympic rings is a
   link: it is a bunch of knots that interact with each other in
   some way. Two circles sitting next to each other, politely not
   touching, are technically a link, but once again not a very
   compelling one. They would be called trivially linked.
   Unlinked unknots. Image: Evelyn Lamb

   The simplest interesting link is the [36]Hopf link: two
   interlocking circles.
   A Hopf link. Image: Evelyn Lamb


   The Olympic rings are kind of like the Hopf link, but longer.
   To some extent that makes them less interesting because it’s
   relatively easy to build them up from smaller pieces. To make
   that idea precise, we can define something called a prime link.
   (The definition of prime knot is similar, but we’ll just focus
   on links because the Olympic rings form a link.)

   Prime numbers, those whole numbers greater than 1 that are
   divisible only by themselves and 1, can be thought of as the
   building blocks of all other whole numbers because you can
   break down a whole number into its prime factors. Similarly,
   links can be decomposed into prime links. Instead of defining
   prime link, it’s easier to define a link that isn’t prime. We
   do that using an operation called a connected ([37]sometimes
   called connect) sum that describes how we can build new knots
   and links from old knots and links. To form the [38]connected
   sum of two links, you cut a segment out of each of them and
   re-glue them so they’re glued together. A link that can’t be
   built from two or more non-trivial links is called prime.


   To see how a connected sum works, we’ll look at how the
   connected sum of two Hopf links gives us a chain of three
   linked rings. In step 1, two Hopf links approach one another.
   Step 1. Image: Evelyn Lamb

   In step 2, they open up.
   Step 2. Image: Evelyn Lamb

   In step 3, the two open rings meet each other.
   Step 3. Image: Evelyn Lamb

   Now, the middle two rings, shown here in silver, are connected,
   so from a topological  point of view, they have fused to become
   one ring. Hence in the final step, we replace those two rings
   with one ring that is topologically equivalent.
   Step 4: Success! The two Hopf links have fused to become a
   chain of three rings. Image: Evelyn Lamb

   You can keep connected summing Hopf links together to get as
   many rings in your link as you want. A similar link with n
   rings in it takes n-1 copies of the Hopf link to make, so the
   Olympic rings are a connected sum of four Hopf links.

   It seems a bit disappointing that a symbol of the best of the
   human race is not a prime link. So I asked [39]Jessica Purcell,
   a mathematician at Monash University in Australia, whether she
   had a recommendation for a better five-ring link so the IOC
   could adopt a mathematically more satisfying symbol if they are
   so inclined. She suggested the minimally twisted 5-chain link,
   which she describes as one of her favorites. That’s a mouthful,
   but a picture will help.
   A minimally twisted 5-chain link. Image: Evelyn Lamb


   Basically, you attach the two ends of the connected sum of four
   Hopf links together, and you've got it. You have to be a little
   careful to get the crossings exactly right, but it’s not too
   hard to do. (You can see a diagram of the link on [40]page 2 of
   this paper.)


   Why is the minimally twisted 5-chain link so great? Well, first
   of all it’s prime, so it stands on its own merits, unlike the
   current symbol, which is built up from smaller links. Another
   reason Purcell told me about is due to the relationship knots
   and links have to [41]three-dimensional spaces, also known as
   [42]three-manifolds. In fact, one of the reasons mathematicians
   study knots and links is not for their own sake but because of
   these spaces, called knot or link complements.


   How do knots and links get tied up (har!) with three-manifolds?
   You take your knot or link, made out of string or binder rings
   or something, and imagine removing it from three-dimensional
   space*. Knot theorists sometimes call it "drilling it out" of
   the space. The remaining manifold is called the knot or link
   complement. For example, if you’re wearing a ring, you can
   think about the the ring's complement as being some
   three-dimensional space minus your ring. Topologists, [43]who
   are often concerned with how many fundamentally different loops
   you can make in a space, find the space minus the ring more
   interesting than the space by itself. That’s because in the
   larger space, every loop is basically the same as every other
   loop. You can just scoot and stretch one loop over to another
   one without cutting or tearing anything.


   For more complicated knots and links, the complements get even
   more interesting than the complement of a ring. Purcell told me
   she likes the minimally twisted 5-chain link in part because of
   its complement. If you want to study it geometrically, you can
   build it out of 10 shapes called regular ideal hyperbolic
   [44]tetrahedra. That means that with a bit of poetic license,
   you could make it out of 10 copies of the [45]Rio 2016 logo,
   which is topologically equivalent to the edges of a
   tetrahedron.


   Purcell assures me that manifolds that can be built from
   regular ideal hyperbolic tetrahedra are very special indeed.
   Getting all the way into what that means is not going to happen
   in this blog post, but she has some [46]lecture notes on
   hyperbolic knot theory if you want to go a bit further.


   In case you were wondering, the complement of the minimally
   twisted 5-chain link is way better than the complement of the
   current Olympic rings, which is based on the complement of the
   Hopf link. The complement of the Hopf link has Euclidean
   geometry, or as I like to call it when I’m feeling
   disrespectful of thousands of years of mathematical tradition,
   snooze-clidean geometry. I’ll take [47]hyperbolic geometry over
   Euclidean geometry any day!


   out that I told a small fib here. An infinite, unbounded
   three-manifold with a tiny knot removed is a bit unwieldy, so
   instead of starting with infinite three-dimensional space,
   mathematicians actually imagine removing it from something
   called the [48]three-sphere, or S^3. It’s similar to a circle
   or a sphere but one dimension higher.


   If that’s confusing, don't worry about it too much. No one is
   going to report you to the math police if you think of removing
   it from regular three-dimensional space instead. There is a
   good reason mathematicians do it the way they do: it’s a lot
   easier to work with finite, or bounded, spaces than infinite
   ones. (Just like the two-dimensional sphere, or the surface of
   a beach ball, the three-sphere has a finite radius.) But as far
   as imagining a knot complement goes, I find it much easier to
   visualize if I think about removing the knot from regular
   three-dimensional space rather than the three-sphere.

   Thanks to Dave Futer, Jessica Purcell, and Dylan Thurston for
   lending me some knot theory knowledge.

   Read about more of my favorite spaces:
   [49]The Cantor Set
   [50]Fat Cantor Sets
   [51]The Topologist’s Sine Curve
   [52]Cantor's Leaky Tent
   [53]The Infinite Earring
   [54]The Line with Two Origins
   [55]The House with Two Rooms
   [56]The Fano Plane
   [57]The Torus
   [58]The Three-Torus
   [59]The Möbius Strip
   [60]The Long Line
   [61]Space-Filling Curves
   [62]The Wallis Sieve
   [63]Two Tori Glued along a Slit
   [64]The Empty Set
   [65]The Menger Sponge


   The views expressed are those of the author(s) and are not
   necessarily those of Scientific American.
   [66][rightsPermsIcon.png] Rights & Permissions
   Advertisement |
   Report Ad



