Review: Hidden Figures

   Margot Lee Shetterly's book about NASA's black women
   mathematicians and engineers is timely and eye-opening



   Share on Facebook
   Share on Twitter
   Share on Reddit
   Email
   Print
   Share via



   Credit: [34]HarperCollins
   Advertisement |
   Report Ad


   I’ve watched [35]Jesse Williams’ powerful speech from the BET
   awards this past June several times. Among other things, he
   points out the hypocrisy in the way white Americans consume
   black culture without actually respecting the people who create
   it. This happens in pop culture—everything from Elvis to
   [36]trend pieces about cornrows that make it sound like white
   women invented them—but it’s not just there. As much as we want
   to pretend science is immune to cultural biases, it’s not.
   Reading [37]Hidden Figures with Williams’ words in the back of
   my mind made me see this book as another example of how our
   culture gladly uses black people’s work without giving them the
   credit they deserve, in this case reinforcing our society’s
   stereotypes about what a scientist looks like.


   Margot Lee Shetterly’s book, which came out in September,
   describes the [38]previously unsung work of the black women
   mathematicians and engineers who worked at the Langley Research
   Center in Virginia and helped NASA put people into orbit and on
   the moon. It’s a reminder that John Glenn and Neil Armstrong
   didn’t make it into space and safely back home again by
   themselves. There’s nothing wrong with celebrating their
   bravery and achievements, but Hidden Figures makes it clear
   that there were more brave people working behind the scenes,
   too.


   Hidden Figures has also been made into a movie starring Taraji
   P. Henson, Octavia Spencer, and Janelle Monáe. It was
   originally advertised as coming out early next year, but I’ve
   [39]seen rumors that it will open in some theaters on Christmas
   this year, qualifying it for the Oscars. The movie will
   doubtless take liberties with the history—it’s a drama, not a
   documentary—but it looks like an inspiring, entertaining film,
   and I can hardly wait to see it.




   Although the book and film focus on a just few of the black
   women who worked for NASA and its [41]predecessor NACA, they
   were not alone. In her research, Shetterly found that dozens of
   women worked as “computers,” mathematicians, or engineers at
   Langley. There just isn’t room to tell all of their stories,
   but the women Shetterly chooses to feature are inspiring
   representatives of this group of scientists.


   Katherine Johnson, one of the women featured in the book and
   film, is still living. She was awarded the Presidental medal of
   freedom in 2015 and is probably the best known of NASA’s black
   women mathematicians. It’s kind of astonishing to think she was
   born before the 19th amendment was ratified, giving women the
   right to vote, and she grew up going to segregated schools.
   When she got to Langley, the restrooms were still segregated,
   though the book notes that she refused to comply with that
   particular rule. ([42]One of the trailers would have you
   believe that a white man tore down that sign; the book does not
   indicate anything of the sort.)


   Hidden Figures is set in the South in the 40s-60s, when the
   Civil Rights movement was taking hold and segregation laws were
   gradually getting overturned. In addition to Johnson’s
   resistance to walking across campus to pee and the other ways
   the black women who worked at Langley protested segregation,
   the book describes the changing landscape outside of the
   research center as well. One of the most sobering passages is
   about school segregation. This scene is about the reaction Mary
   Jackson, another Langley mathematician, had to finally getting
   permission to attend engineering classes at Hampton High
   School, a white school.

     Hampton High School was a dilapidated, musty old building.

     A stunned Mary Jackson wondered: was this what she and the
     rest of the black children in the city had been denied all
     these years? This rundown, antiquated place? She had just
     assumed that if whites had worked so hard to deny admission
     to the school, it must have been an wonderland. But this?
     Why not combine the resources to build a beautiful school
     for both black and white students? Throughout the South,
     municipalities maintained two parallel inefficient school
     systems, which gave the short end of the stick to the
     poorest whites as well as blacks. The cruelty of racial
     prejudice was so often accompanied by absurdity, a tangle of
     arbitrary rules and distinctions that subverted the shared
     interests of people who had been taught to see themselves as
     irreconcilably different.

   The commitment to segregation and white supremacy ran so deep
   that many white people either didn’t understand or didn’t care
   how much it was damaging the entire community.

   One of the most refreshing things about Hidden Figures is how
   ordinary the women’s lives were in many ways. They cared about
   their families, they were active in their churches and
   communities. Unlike the mathematicians we usually see in
   movies, they were not [43]tortured, friendless geniuses
   laboring in isolation. The book makes it clear that these were
   extraordinarily talented people, but it shows that those
   talents are not incompatible with having a fulfilling life
   outside of work.


   Racism, white supremacy, and stereotypes about what kinds of
   people are good at math and science still keep talented people
   from becoming mathematicians, scientists, and engineers, and
   all of us lose out on their talents when that happens. Hidden
   Figures is an eye-opening testament to the fact that black
   women were with NASA from the start. We should know about their
   accomplishments too.

   The views expressed are those of the author(s) and are not
   necessarily those of Scientific American.
   [44][rightsPermsIcon.png] Rights & Permissions
   Advertisement |
   Report Ad



