By [35]Cass Sunstein and [36]Richard Thaler


     December 7, 2016


   [37]The book “The Undoing Project: A Friendship That Changed
   Our Minds,” by Michael Lewis, tells the story of the
   psychologists Amos Tversky, left, and Daniel Kahneman, right.
   The book “The Undoing Project: A Friendship That Changed Our
   Minds,” by Michael Lewis, tells the story of the psychologists
   Amos Tversky, left, and Daniel Kahneman, right.CreditPhotograph
   Courtesy Barbara Tversky


   In 2003, we reviewed “Moneyball,” Michael Lewis’s book about
   Billy Beane and the Oakland A’s. The book, we noted, had become
   a sensation, despite focussing on what would seem to be the
   least exciting aspect of professional sports: upper management.
   Beane was a failed Major League Baseball player who went into
   the personnel side of the business and, by applying superior
   “metrics,” had remarkable success with a financial underdog. We
   loved the book—and pointed out that, unbeknownst to the
   author, [38]it was really about behavioral economics, the
   combination of economics and psychology in which we shared a
   common interest, and which we had explored together with
   respect to public policy and law.


   Why isn’t the market for baseball players “efficient”? What is
   the source of the biases that Beane was able to exploit? Some
   of the answers to these questions, we suggested, might be found
   by applying the insights of the Israeli psychologists Daniel
   Kahneman and Amos Tversky, on whose work [39]behavioral
   economics greatly relies. Lewis read the review, began to take
   an interest in the whole topic of human rationality, and,
   improbably, decided to write a book about Kahneman and Tversky.
   He kindly even gave us credit for setting him down this path.


   Though we were pleased that Lewis was taking an interest in our
   field, we admit to being skeptical when we heard about his book
   plan. Granted, Lewis has shown many times before—not only with
   “Moneyball” but also with “The Big Short,” his book about the
   real-estate market, and “Flash Boys,” which is about high-speed
   trading—that he can write a riveting book about an arcane
   subject. And we did not doubt the appeal of the book’s main
   characters: one of us had written several papers with Kahneman,
   and the other had known Kahneman and Tversky since 1977 and had
   collaborated with both men. (Tversky died in 1996, at the age
   of fifty-nine. Kahneman, now eighty-two, is blessedly still
   very much with us.) Both of us had been deeply influenced by
   their joint work on the psychology of judgment and
   decision-making. Still, how was Lewis going to turn a story
   about their lives into the kind of page-turner that he’s known
   for? Kahneman and Tversky were brilliant, but they did most of
   their work together more than thirty years ago, and they worked
   primarily by talking to each other, switching between English
   and Hebrew. Where’s the book?

   Our skepticism was misplaced. The book, titled “The Undoing
   Project: A Friendship That Changed Our Minds,” captivated both
   of us, even though we thought we knew most of the story—and
   even though the book is just what Lewis had said it would be, a
   book about Amos and Danny, two men who changed how people think
   about how people think. Lewis accomplishes this in his usual
   way, by telling fascinating stories about intriguing people,
   and leaving readers to make their own judgments about what
   lessons should be learned. He provides a basic primer on the
   research of Kahneman and Tversky, but almost in passing; what
   is of interest here is the collaboration between two
   scientists. Having written several articles and one book
   together, we have firsthand experience in both the joys and
   struggles of getting two minds to speak with one voice, and the
   conflicts that can arise when one author is a fast writer and
   the other likes to linger over each word. And while one gleans
   a good deal about teamwork from the book, Lewis doesn’t spell
   the lessons out. Instead, the reader learns through
   observation, getting as close as anyone could to being in those
   closed rooms where the two men worked.

   In 1968, Tversky and Kahneman were both rising stars in the
   psychology department at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
   They had little else in common. Tversky was born in Israel and
   had been a military hero. He had a bit of a quiet swagger
   (along with, incongruously, a slight lisp). He was an optimist,
   not only because it suited his personality but also because, as
   he put it, “when you are a pessimist and the bad thing happens,
   you live it twice. Once when you worry about it, and the second
   time when it happens.” A night owl, he would often schedule
   meetings with his graduate students at midnight, over tea, with
   no one around to bother them.

   Tversky was a font of memorable one-liners, and he found much
   of life funny. He could also be sharp with critics. After a
   nasty academic battle with some evolutionary psychologists, he
   proclaimed, “Listen to evolutionary psychologists long enough,
   and you’ll stop believing in evolution.” When asked about
   artificial intelligence, Tversky replied, “We study natural
   stupidity.” (He did not really think that people were stupid,
   but the line was too good to pass up.) He also tossed off such
   wisdom as “The secret to doing good research is always to be a
   little underemployed. You waste years by not being able to
   waste hours.” Managers who spend most of their lives in
   meetings should post that thought on their office walls.

   Early in his career, Tversky was a “mathematical psychologist,”
   which meant that he used formal models to characterize human
   behavior. He didn’t care for metaphors: “They replace genuine
   uncertainty about the world with semantic ambiguity. A metaphor
   is a cover-up.” He was organized and highly disciplined. His
   office was spotless; there was nothing on his desk except a
   pad, a mechanical pencil, and an eraser. (Even Tversky made
   mistakes.)

   If there were a pad and pencil in Daniel Kahneman’s office, on
   the other hand, Kahneman would struggle to find them. Born in
   Tel Aviv when his mother was visiting family, he spent his
   childhood in Paris, speaking French as his first language. His
   father was a chemist in a cosmetics company. In 1940, the
   German occupation put the family at risk. Hiding in the South
   of France, they managed to survive (with the exception of his
   father, who died in 1944, from untreated diabetes). After the
   war, the rest of the family immigrated to Palestine.

   A constant worrier, Kahneman is an early riser who often wakes
   up alarmed about something. He is prone to pessimism—claiming
   that, by expecting the worst, he is never disappointed. This
   pessimism extends to the expectations he has for his own
   research, which he likes to question: “I get a sense of
   movement and discovery whenever I find a flaw in my thinking.”
   In our own collaborations with Kahneman, we saw this close up,
   as he would proclaim, at what seemed to be the final stages of
   some joint work, that he had just discovered a fatal problem
   with our whole approach and that we would have to give up or
   start all over again. He was usually wrong about that—but
   sometimes he was right, and the constant worry made the work
   much better.

   Tversky liked to say, “People are not so
   complicated. Relationships between people are complicated.” But
   then he would pause and add, “Except for Danny.” So, yes, they
   were different, but those who saw them together, spending
   endless hours just talking, knew that something special
   happened when they applied their two very different minds to a
   problem. Lewis both captures and sharpens the contrast between
   them, showing us why their collaboration was impossibly
   incongruous and yet perfectly complementary.

   The names Kahneman and Tversky are now well known among social
   scientists, but even experts in the field will not know the
   story of how their collaboration began. At the beginning of
   their careers, they worked in different branches of psychology:
   Kahneman studied vision, while Tversky studied decision-making.
   Like much of psychology, these topics can be studied only
   indirectly; one can’t directly monitor what people see or think
   (yet). In those days, mathematical psychologists like Tversky
   conceived of thinking in much the same way as economists:
   choices were thought to be made more or less “correctly,” as
   people incorporate new information and make good choices for
   themselves. By contrast, those studying vision made much use of
   common mistakes such as visual illusions. (What does the fact
   that we see what seems to be water on a desert highway tell us
   about the vision system?) As Kahneman put it, “How do you
   understand memory? You don’t study memory. You study
   forgetting.”

   In the spring of 1969, Kahneman invited Tversky to speak at his
   seminar. Tversky chose to outline some cutting-edge experiments
   about how people learn from new information. The experiments
   seemed to demonstrate that ordinary people were close to being
   rational; they thought like “intuitive statisticians.” Though
   the presentation was impressive, Kahneman thought that the
   experiments were, as Lewis writes, “just incredibly stupid,”
   and that they demonstrated no such thing. Insisting that
   judgments are more like sensory perceptions (and similarly
   prone to error), he went after Tversky hard, as people do in
   the best academic environments. Tversky almost never lost an
   argument, but he lost this one.

   Very much in character, Tversky reacted to this loss by coming
   back for more. His friend Avishai Margalit, the distinguished
   Israeli philosopher, calls the session “Kahneman and Tversky’s
   Big Bang.” He recalls meeting an agitated Tversky, who “started
   by dragging me into a room. He said, ‘You won’t believe what
   happened to me.’ He tells me that he had given this talk and
   Danny had said, ‘Brilliant talk, but I don’t believe a word of
   it.’ ”

   Before long, Kahneman and Tversky were in constant
   conversation. They worked intensely in a small seminar room or
   a coffee shop, or while taking a long walk. The sessions were
   private; no one else was invited to join. As they began to
   produce work together, each sentence would be written,
   rewritten, and rewritten again, with Kahneman manning the
   typewriter. (Tversky never did master the art of the keyboard.)
   On a good day, they would write a paragraph or two. Everything
   was produced jointly; they did not really know where one’s
   thought ended and the other’s began. Graduate students “now
   wondered how two so radically different personalities could
   find common ground, much less become soul mates,” Lewis writes.
   One reason was that “Danny was always sure he was wrong. Amos
   was always sure he was right.”

   That actually did help. While Tversky was “the most terrifying
   mind most people had ever encountered,” he was
   uncharacteristically receptive to Kahneman’s ideas. Kahneman,
   for his part, found Tversky’s arrogance surprisingly
   liberating: “It was extremely rewarding to feel like Amos,
   smarter than almost everyone.” And they laughed together—a lot.
   As Kahneman said, “Amos was always very funny, and in his
   presence I became funny as well, so we spent hours of solid
   work in continuous amusement.”

   What followed was a period of extraordinary creativity—the best
   and most original work that either of them had done, or would
   do, at any stage in his career. In the period between 1971 and
   1979, they published the work that would eventually win
   Kahneman the Nobel Prize in Economics. (The prize would
   certainly have been shared with Tversky had he still been
   alive. Nobel Prizes are not awarded posthumously.) There were
   two distinct themes: judgment and decision-making. Judgment is
   about estimating (or guessing) magnitudes and
   probabilities. How likely is it that a billionaire businessman
   from New York with no experience in government gets elected
   President? Decision-making is about how we choose, especially
   when there is uncertainty (meaning almost all the time). What
   should we do now?

   Kahneman and Tversky showed that, in both of these domains,
   human beings hardly behave as if they were trained or intuitive
   statisticians. Rather, their judgments and decisions deviate in
   identifiable ways from idealized economic models. Most of the
   importance of Kahneman and Tversky’s work lies in the claim
   that departures from perfect rationality can be anticipated and
   specified. In other words, errors are not only common but
   also predictable.

   For instance: ask people what they think is the ratio of gun
   homicides to gun suicides in the United States. Most of them
   will guess that gun homicides are much more common, but the
   truth is that gun suicides happen about twice as often. The
   explanation that Kahneman and Tversky offered for this type of
   judgment error is based on the concept of “availability.” That
   is, the easier it is for us to recall instances in which
   something has happened, the more likely we will assume it is.
   This rule of thumb works pretty well most of the time, but it
   can lead to big mistakes when frequency and ease of recall
   diverge. Since gun homicides get more media coverage than gun
   suicides, people wrongly think they are more likely. The
   availability heuristic, as Kahneman and Tversky called it,
   leads people to both excessive fear and unjustified
   complacency—and it can lead governments astray as well.

   The influence of their work has been immense—not only in
   psychology and economics, where it has become part of the
   normal conversation, but in every other field of social
   science, [40]as well as medicine, law, and, increasingly,
   business and public policy. And this legacy is based on what by
   current standards would be considered a very small number of
   papers—eight, to be precise. (They went on to write more papers
   together in the years that followed, but the foundation was
   laid with those few from the nineteen-seventies.)


   The low rate of output was one of their strengths, and is a
   direct result of their joint personality traits. Kahneman’s
   constant worry about how they might be wrong combined perfectly
   with Tversky’s mantra: “Let’s get it right.” And it takes a
   long time to write a paper when both authors have to agree on
   every word, one by one.

   The Kahneman and Tversky partnership was extraordinary in terms
   of its scientific impact—they are the Lennon and McCartney of
   social science—and even now, when joint work is increasingly
   common in academia, enduring teams like theirs are extremely
   rare. In Lewis’s account, the relationship between Kahneman and
   Tversky was as intense as a marriage. As anyone who has been
   married knows, marriages can be fraught, and they sometimes
   dissolve entirely, rarely amicably. Tversky and Kahneman never
   got divorced, but they did start dating other people, and their
   relationship became strained.

   After the two decided to leave Israel, in 1978, Tversky quickly
   received offers from Harvard and Stanford (where he ended up).
   Kahneman, who was looking for jobs jointly with his equally
   distinguished wife, Anne Treisman, was hired at the University
   of British Columbia, in Vancouver—a fine university, but lower
   in status than those that pursued his friend. At a relatively
   young age, Tversky received honorary degrees from Yale and the
   University of Chicago.

   Although their work had been a true collaboration of equals,
   Tversky had unofficially been declared the star of the team,
   which didn’t sit well with Kahneman. Tensions were aggravated
   in 1984, when Tversky was given a MacArthur “genius” grant, and
   Kahneman wasn’t. Kahneman was not actually eligible for the
   award, which is given only to American citizens or residents,
   but not many people realized this—and, what’s more, when
   Kahneman moved to Berkeley, two years later, thus becoming
   eligible, the MacArthur Foundation still did not give him a
   fellowship. The incident illustrates another one of Kahneman
   and Tversky’s most famous concepts: loss aversion. When the
   MacArthur grants are awarded every year, only the most
   egomaniacal of us read the list and say, “Damn, I lost.”
   Unless, that is, your best friend wins the prize for work you
   did entirely together.

   The two did not stop being friends, or stop talking nearly
   every day, or stop working on occasional projects. But once
   they were separated by distance, and began working with
   students and other co-authors, their relationship lost its
   ease. The way Kahneman saw it, “Amos changed. When I gave him
   an idea he would look for what was good in it. For what was
   right with it. . . . He stopped doing that.” He noted,
   “Something happens when you are with a woman you love. You know
   something happened. You know it’s not good. But you go on.”
   Tellingly, he added, “I wanted something from him, not from the
   world.” After one particularly difficult interaction, Kahneman
   decided, and told Tversky, that they were no longer even
   friends. “I sort of divorced him.” This is the kind of outburst
   that Kahneman typically takes back within a few days, as he did
   at least a dozen times when he declared that he was abandoning
   for good his book project, which would eventually become the
   mega-best-seller “Thinking, Fast and Slow.”

   In the case of his breakup with Tversky, fate intervened to
   hasten the inevitable reversal. Only three days later, Tversky
   called to say that he had just been diagnosed with a malignant
   melanoma and that he had, at most, six months to live. As
   Kahneman recalled, “He was saying, ‘We’re friends, whatever you
   think we are.’ ”

   In the remaining six months, Kahneman and Tversky worked on the
   introduction to an edited collection of papers related to their
   work, an introduction Kahneman had to finish after Tversky
   died. Kahneman had (of course) worried about completing this
   introduction alone, and Tversky had (of course) assured him
   that he should just trust the mental model that, by now, he
   surely had of Tversky’s mind. But no one has that model, alas.
   That is why collaborations are so special: one partner cannot
   simply replace the mind of the other, even after twenty-five
   years.

   Tversky once said, “It is sometimes easier to make the world a
   better place than to prove you have made the world a better
   place.” But it is not hard to prove that Amos and Danny did
   so—you only have to read those papers that they published in
   the seventies. Or, for that matter, Lewis’s book.

   Cass Sunstein is the Robert Walmsley University Professor at
   Harvard and the author of “The World According to Star Wars.”


   Richard Thaler is a professor at the Booth School of Business,
   at the University of Chicago, and the author of “Misbehaving:
   The Making of Behavioral Economics.”


      More:






      Get a weekly digest about the world in literature from The New
      Yorker.

   Enter e-mail address ____________________ (BUTTON) Go

   Please enter a valid e-mail address

   Submitting...

   Thank you for subscribing. You’ll receive your first newsletter
   soon. [47]View all newsletters »



