 Your brain on math: Functional coupling between neural regions during
                         mathematical cognition

      November 21, 2016 by Stuart Mason Dambrot [8]feature


   [9]Electrodes within the VTC
   Fig. 2. (A) Electrodes within the VTC. The placement of
   electrodes in all 14 subjects who had electrodes over the VTC
   is projected onto the right hemisphere of an atlas brain. The
   anatomical subdivisions within the VTC considered in this study
   are shown on the left hemisphere. aFG, anterior fusiform gyrus;
   aITG, anterior inferior temporal gyrus; LOG, lateral occipital
   gyrus; mFG, midfusiform gyrus; pFG, posterior fusiform gyrus;
   pITG, posterior inferior temporal gyrus. (B) HFB responses to
   numerals and other visual symbols in task 1 (Upper) and when
   analyzing math or memory statements in task 2 (Lower), grouped
   by sites in each VTC subregion, averaged across all subjects.
   Error bars indicate SE across electrodes. Asterisks indicate a
   significant difference in HFB response between math and memory
   conditions (after FDR correction). Note that the selectivity of
   individual electrodes within a region of interest (ROI) may be
   different from the average selectivity of that ROI. (C)
   Highlighted are individual electrodes across all subjects that
   are significantly numeral active relative to the ITI (brain at
   far left), numeral selective relative to letters and foreign
   symbols (second brain from left), math active relative to the
   ITI (third brain from left), and math selective relative to
   memory and also with no significant memory response (brain at
   right). The color of each electrode denotes its anatomical
   region (determined in individual brain space). Electrodes
   outlined in black have significant responses at the level of P
   < 0.05, FDR-corrected, and those outlined in white are
   significant at P < 0.0 5, uncorrected. (D) Exemplar HFB time
   courses during task 1 and task 2 are shown for an exemplar NFA
   site (from subject S13). The shaded area represents the SE
   across trials for each condition. Credit: Daitch AL, Foster BL,
   Schrouff J, Rangarajan V, Kaşikçi I, Gattas S, and Parvizi J
   (2016) Mapping human temporal and parietal neuronal population
   activity and functional coupling during mathematical cognition.
   Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 113(46):E7277–E7286.


   (Medical Xpress)—While human infants, nonhuman primates and
   birds are capable of approximating or comparing rough
   arithmetic quantities, post-infant humans are unique in
   possessing precise mathematical cognition. Historically, what
   is known as the Triple Code model of numeric processing has
   hypothesized that symbolic, verbal, and abstract processing –
   for example, simple visual recognition of a numeral,
   determining the larger of two numerals, and verbal naming of a
   numeral, respectively – occur in well-defined coupled brain
   regions, all or some of which interact. Recently, however,
   scientists at Baylor College of Medicine, Houston employing
   electrocorticography (ECoG) electrophysiological recording – in
   which electrodes are placed directly on the exposed surface of
   the brain's cerebral cortex – not only reconfirmed
   math-selective hubs within the lateral parietal cortex (LPC)
   and ventral temporal cortex (VTC), but more significantly found
   what they describe as a remarkable diversity of neural
   responses within each region at both millimeter and millisecond
   scales. The researchers suggest that numerical processing
   involves multiple bidirectional functional loops in these, and
   perhaps nearby, sites – and while acknowledging that their new
   model does not take other brain regions into account (such as
   frontal lobe or subcortical structures like the thalamus or
   basal ganglia) that are likely to be involved in numerical
   cognition, it may serve as a framework for future mathematical
   cognition studies.

   Dr. Amy L. Daitch, a postdoc in Dr. Josef Parvizi's lab at
   Stanford University, discussed the paper she and her co-authors
   published in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
   the United States of America. "Our main challenge in measuring
   lateral parietal cortex (LPC) and ventral temporal cortex (VTC)
   neuronal electrophysiological activity using direct
   intracranial electrocorticography recordings was finding
   neurosurgical cases that had ample coverage in one or both of
   these regions," Daitch tells Medical Xpress. "It's very rare to
   find simultaneous recordings from neuronal populations in the
   human lateral parietal cortex or the ventral temporal cortex,"
   Daitch continues, "because these two regions are less
   frequently implanted in neurosurgical patients. More
   importantly, arithmetic tasks during mathematical cognition
   experiments engage only a few smaller regions within the LPC
   and VTC."

   The researchers focused on the significant heterogeneity of
   responses within a small anatomical area, demonstrating that
   electrodes 5mm apart may show widely different response
   profiles – meaning that a single electrode in each of the two
   areas studied – LPC and VTC – will not provide the selective
   response data required. In fact, Daitch recounts, due to the
   rarity of LPC and VTC implantations and as well as sparseness
   of activity during arithmetic tasks, it took the team several
   years to assemble their group of subjects, or cohort.

   On the other hand, intracranial EEG signals have a high
   signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 100-300% increased power
   compared to baseline. This allowed the scientists to measure an
   individual's neuronal population activity without averaging the
   signal across individuals. "By profiling activity patterns in
   different VTC and LPC subregions, we were able to report unique
   timing and selectivity of response profiles across VTC and LPC
   subregions," she explains. "We could see how neuronal
   population activity unfolds in these two regions during simple
   arithmetic tasks, as well as review the profile of responses
   across tasks at an individual VTC site and see how it predicted
   its functional coupling with the LPC site." For example, Daitch
   recounts, the researchers found that the selectivity of a VTC
   site to math processing was predictive of its degree of
   coupling with the specific LPC neuronal population that also
   had selective responses during the arithmetic task, and that
   the response profile of this VTC site was predictive of the
   direction of its coupling with the LPC site.

   [10]Electrodes within the LPC


   Fig. 3. (A) Electrodes within the LPC. The placement of
   electrodes in all 14 subjects with electrodes over the LPC is
   shown on the right hemisphere of an atlas brain (Lower). Also
   shown are the anatomical subdivisions within the LPC considered
   in this study (Upper). AG, angular gyrus; aIPS, anterior
   intraparietal sulcus; aSOG, anterior superior occipital gyrus;
   pIPS, posterior intraparietal sulcus; SMG, supramarginal gyrus;
   SPL, superior parietal lobule. (B) HFB responses to numerals
   and other visual symbols in task 1 (Upper) and when analyzing
   math or memory statements in task 2 (Lower), grouped by sites
   in each LPC subregion, averaged across all subjects. Error bars
   indicate SE across electrodes. Asterisks indicate a significant
   difference in HFB response between math and memory conditions
   (after FDR correction). (C) Highlighted are individual
   electrodes across all subjects that are significantly math
   active relative to the ITI (Left) and math selective relative
   to memory and also with no significant memory response (Right).
   The color of each electrode denotes its anatomical region as
   determined in individual brain space. Electrodes outlined in
   black have significant responses at the level of P < 0.05,
   FDR-corrected, and those outlined in white are significant at P
   < 0.05, uncorrected. (D) Exemplar HFB time courses during task
   1 and task 2 are shown for a site in the aIPS of S11 that does
   not respond to the passive presentation of numerals, letters,
   or false fonts but is selectively engaged during active
   mathematical computation. The shaded area represents the SE
   across trials for each condition. Credit: Daitch AL, Foster BL,
   Schrouff J, Rangarajan V, Kaşikçi I, Gattas S, and Parvizi J
   (2016) Mapping human temporal and parietal neuronal population
   activity and functional coupling during mathematical cognition.
   Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 113(46):E7277–E7286.

   The study's results suggested the presence of what appears to
   be a temporally- and functionally-synchronized and anatomically
   selective numerical cognition system. "Just as language
   processing is associated with a brain network engaged during
   different aspects of language – for example, visual, semantic
   and phonetic components – we've identified a brain network for
   numerical cognition which appears to be involved in processes
   such as the visual recognition of numerals and arithmetic
   computations." Daitch explains. She notes that the posterior
   inferior temporal gyrus (pITG) region of the VTC, which is
   selective to numerical/mathematical processing, is anatomically
   distinct from other VTC regions that may be selective for the
   processing of letters and words, and moreover exhibited
   anatomically selective functional coupling – during both
   mathematical tasks and at rest – with an area of the parietal
   lobe associated with processing quantity. "These results," she
   underscores, "are in line with the theory that the intrinsic
   connectivity of brain regions is directly linked to their
   ultimate functional selectivity. "

   [INS: :INS]

   One of the study's key findings was the observation of
   functional millimeter- and millisecond-scale heterogeneity
   within the LPC and VTC regions. "The temporal and spatial
   specificity afforded by intracranial recordings allowed us to
   identify heterogeneity within this numerical cognition network
   in terms of the engagement of specific neuronal populations
   during different stages of numerical processing," Daitch says.
   "Different regions of this network – and even different sites
   within the same general anatomical region – were engaged at
   different times during mathematical computations, which
   suggests that they are involved in different stages of
   numerical processing." As a result, the scientists conclude
   that future studies with behavioral paradigms that better
   isolate distinct processes within numerical cognition will
   allow them to further refine the fine-grained functional
   architecture of this network.

   Relatedly, the researchers found empirical evidence of
   functional coupling between the LPC and VTC during mathematical
   cognition. Theories of numerical cognition (for example, the
   Triple-code model, which postulates that the human brain
   contains three different numerical representations – symbolic,
   verbal, and abstract quantity – each coded in a different brain
   region) predicted an interaction between VTC and LPC subregions
   during mathematical processing. In a significant finding, the
   researchers provided the first empirical evidence of this
   hypothesis. Importantly, though, this coupling was not purely
   feedforward from the VTC to LPC as many theories predicted.
   Rather, heterogeneous subpopulations within the VTC and LPC
   appeared to be engaged in distinct bidirectional loops between
   these regions during different stages of arithmetic
   computations.

   "Importantly, the specific functions of the LPC vs VTC in
   numerical cognition are not as clear cut as previously
   thought," Daitch points out. "For example, many sites within
   the VTC do not appear to be involved in the visual recognition
   of individual numerals, but are rather only active during
   arithmetic computations. While it therefore appears as if this
   numerical cognition network as a whole is engaged during many
   mathematical processes, further work is needed to determine
   whether different regions within this network do indeed have
   distinct functions within numerical cognition, and if so, what
   they are."

   [11]Exemplar HFB time courses during the numeral condition in
   task 1 at sites within three different VTC regions in a single
   subject


   Fig. 4. (A) Exemplar HFB time courses during the numeral
   condition in task 1 at sites within three different VTC regions
   in a single subject (S13). The HFB time course at each site is
   scaled by its own maximum. The shaded area represents the SE
   across trials for each condition. Note that the pITG site
   responds later to numerals than either the pFG or mFG site. (B)
   Group-averaged differences between the HFB ROL to numerals at
   electrode pairs in different anatomical regions. Only electrode
   pairs within an individual subject were considered. Number of
   electrode pairs per ROI-pair: LOG/pFG-pITG: 44 pairs across
   four subjects; LOG/pFG-mFG: 34 pairs across four subjects;
   pITG-mFG: 45 pairs across seven subjects. Asterisks denote
   significant differences in ROL between two anatomical regions
   (*P < 0.05, FDR-corrected). (C) The approximate range of the
   ROL to numerals for each anatomical region is plotted in
   seconds. Data are shown as mean ± 1 SD across all subjects and
   all electrodes. (D) Exemplar HFB time courses during the math
   condition in task 2 at sites within three different VTC
   subregions and two LPC regions in a single subject (S4). The
   HFB time course at each site is scaled by its own maximum. The
   shaded area represents the SE across trials for each condition.
   Note that in this subject the pITG and aIPS sites respond after
   the LOG/pFG, mFG, and SPL sites and respond nearly
   simultaneously with each other. (E) Group-averaged differences
   between the HFB ROLs during the math condition (task 2) at
   electrode pairs in different anatomical regions. Only electrode
   pairs within an individual subject were considered. Number of
   electrode pairs per ROI-pair: LOG/pFG-pITG: 23 pairs across
   five subjects; LOG/pFG-mFG: two pairs across one subject;
   LOG/pFG-SPL: four pairs across one subject; LOG/pFG-aIPS: six
   pairs across two subjects; pITG-mFG: 14 pairs across five
   subjects; pITG-SPL: 17 pairs across four subjects; pITG-aIPS:
   14 pairs across four subjects; mFG-SPL: six pairs across two
   subjects; mFG-aIPS: five pairs across two subjects; SPL-aIPS:
   11 pairs across four subjects. Asterisks indicate significant
   differences in ROL between two anatomical regions (*P < 0.05,
   FDR-corrected). (F) The approximate range of the ROL to math
   for each anatomical region is plotted in seconds. Data are
   shown as mean ± 1 SD. Credit: Daitch AL, Foster BL, Schrouff J,
   Rangarajan V, Kaşikçi I, Gattas S, and Parvizi J (2016) Mapping
   human temporal and parietal neuronal population activity and
   functional coupling during mathematical cognition. Proc Natl
   Acad Sci USA 113(46):E7277–E7286.

   Medical Xpress asked Daitch if there might be potential value
   in determining the relative evolutionary appearance of the
   brain regions involved in numerical cognition. (For example,
   the region involved with abstract numerical processing may be
   assumed to have appeared first due to its (1) quasi-isomorphic
   mapping of the equal number of real-world objects and (2)
   presence in nonhuman primates). "According to the Neuronal
   Recycling Hypothesis^1 – which posits that cultural inventions
   invade evolutionarily older brain circuits and inherit many of
   their structural constraints – brain regions within the VTC
   that are selective for words or numbers may be taking over
   regions that are inherently selective for combinations of line
   segments and curves (which make up numbers and letters in most
   languages). The anatomical consistency of the number form and
   word form area within the VTC is further thought to be driven
   by the intrinsic connectivity of each of these areas with other
   brain regions, like the IPS which is thought to code for
   numerosity for the number form area, and language areas for the
   word form area", she replied. "Our result showing strong
   top-down activity from the IPS to pITG supports this idea.
   However, by recording activity from children as they perform
   mathematical tasks in future studies, we'll be able to see how
   math-related regions within the LPC and VTC develop with
   learning, and which regions exhibit innate selectivity for
   numerical information prior to learning.

   Regarding the potential role of the increasing number and
   efficacy of cognitive neuroprosthetics in addressing
   neurological conditions leading to compromised numerical
   processing capabilities, Daitch is "hopeful that the knowledge
   gained about the neural mechanisms underlying numerical
   cognition in healthy subjects may lead to the development of
   treatments for people with compromised numerical processing
   abilities. For example, neuroprosthetics may be able to
   modulate the activity in the aforementioned math-related brain
   regions within the LPC and VTC."

   As to the planned next steps in their research, Daitch and her
   colleagues are designing experiments which better isolate
   distinct processes within numerical cognition. "For example,"
   she illustrates, "visually recognizing a numeral versus making
   a quantity judgment on that numeral – for example, if it's
   greater than a specified quantity. We want to see which brain
   regions are engaged during different levels of numerical
   decisions, and compare the interaction between the VTC and LPC
   during different levels of numerical processing. For example,
   does simply looking at a numeral or making a visual judgment on
   a numeral – such as its color – still activate the
   intraparietal sulcus (aIPS)? Such a finding would be suggestive
   of an automatic association of a visual numeral with its
   quantity representation."

   The scientists are also interested in studying the activity of
   the pITG and aIPS across development, as children learn to
   associate numerical symbols with quantities – specifically, how
   does the selectivity of the pITG to numerical/math processing,
   as well as the nature of its coupling with the aIPS, change
   with development? "While ECoG is not conducive to longitudinal
   studies, we plan to record from younger children – who are in
   the process of learning numerical information – to gain insight
   into the development of this numerical cognition system."

   [12]Math-active sites in four different anatomical regions in
   an exemplar subject (S11; this subject had no math-active SPL
   sites)


   Fig. 5. (A) Math-active sites in four different anatomical
   regions in an exemplar subject (S11; this subject had no
   math-active SPL sites). (B) HFB time course during task 3 at
   each site in A (scaled by each site’s own maximum). The shaded
   area represents the SE across trials for each condition. Note
   that although the pITG and aIPS sites respond more to the
   second digit than to the first digit, the pFG and mFG sites
   respond more to the first digit than to the second digit (the
   pITG site shown here is not within the NFA). (C) At the group
   level, the ratio of the HFB response to the second digit
   relative to the response to the first digit was larger than 1
   in the pITG and aITG and was less than 1 in the LOG/pFG, mFG,
   and SPL. Brackets represent significant differences in the
   ratio between regions (solid bracket: P < 0.05, FDR-corrected;
   dashed bracket: P < 0.05, uncorrected). Error bars indicate SE
   across electrodes. Credit: Daitch AL, Foster BL, Schrouff J,
   Rangarajan V, Kaşikçi I, Gattas S, and Parvizi J (2016) Mapping
   human temporal and parietal neuronal population activity and
   functional coupling during mathematical cognition. Proc Natl
   Acad Sci USA 113(46):E7277–E7286.

   Daitch tells Medical Xpress that there are other innovations
   they might consider developing. "Since our findings thus far
   are purely correlative in terms of associating specific
   neuronal populations with numerical cognition, we would like to
   apply other techniques, such as electrical brain stimulation
   (EBS), to gain a better understanding of the causal role of
   these [13]brain regions in different aspects of numerical and
   mathematical processing. Targeting different areas – for
   example, aIPS vs. pITG – with EBS and observing the behavioral
   effects of each would allow us to better identify the specific
   functional roles of each region."


   Daitch concludes by addressing other areas of research that
   might benefit from their study. "Many children suffer from
   dyscalculia," she illustrates. (Dyscalculia is the difficulty
   performing arithmetic and/or understanding numbers and
   quantities.) "The neural underpinnings of this developmental
   disorder are still not well understood. The IPS, which codes
   for approximate quantity, may be impaired in this population or
   possibly in the interaction between the pITG and the IPS. We
   hope that by studying the dynamics of these two regions in
   subjects with intact math abilities, we will gain insight into
   the potential neural mechanisms underlying developmental
   dyscalculia."

   Explore further: [14]Development of the numerical reasoning
   network found to not be vision based


   More information: Mapping human temporal and parietal neuronal
   population activity and functional coupling during mathematical
   cognition, PNAS November 15, 2016 vol. 113 no. 46 E7277-E7286,
   [15]doi:10.1073/pnas.1608434113


   Related:
   ^1Cultural Recycling of Cortical Maps, Neuron 25 October 2007,
   [16]Volume 56, Issue 2, p384–398,
   [17]doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2007.10.004


   Journal reference: [18]Neuron [19]search and more info
   [20]website [21]Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
   [22]search and more info [23]website


   809 shares
   [24]feedback feedback to editors


   © 2016 Medical Xpress

   [25]Tweet


   [26]add to favorites Favorites
   [27]email to friend Email
   [28]print Print
   [29]save as pdf PDF


