Most Popular

    1. [50]The Myth of the Kindly General Lee


    2. [52]What Trump Doesn't Understand About Gun Control in
       Great Britain


    3. [54]My Family’s Slave


    4. [56]The Panic President


    5. [58]What ISIS Really Wants









           mailto:?subject=The Sexist Response to a Science Book Prize &body=After Andrea Wulf won the Royal Society’s highest honor for her book The Invention of Nature, a writer at The Guardian attributed it to a new fondness for “female-friendly” biographies among prize juries.

       Text Size


   Last week, the Royal Society held its ceremony to honor the
   best popular-science book of the year.  I was there, having had
   the good fortune to be one of the finalists for my recent book,
   [67]The Hunt for Vulcan.  I didn’t expect to win—partly because
   of my baseline pessimism, partly because of the strength of the
   competition, and partly because I had set out to write a kind
   of miniature, a brief book on a quirky topic.  Whatever the
   reason, I was right: I didn’t.


   The event itself was good fun.  Each of the authors read a
   passage from their work; the head judge for the prize, author
   Bill Bryson, led us in a brief question-and-answer session, in
   which we compared notes on what moved us to write about
   science. Then came the moment of truth.  Venkatraman
   Ramakrishnan, the president of the Royal Society, approached
   the podium, opened the envelope, and announced that Andrea Wulf
   had won for The Invention of Nature.

   The shortlist for the award, formally, the Royal Society
   Insight Investment Book Prize, was extraordinary, boasting
   [68]six fantastic books. All of them will reward you should you
   crack their spines, and Wulf’s book was particularly deserving,
   which is why it was so infuriating to read a recent column that
   attempts to diminish her achievement.
   That’s both wrong and obtuse in its stereotyping as female what
   is one of the most basic tools almost every non-fiction writer
   uses.


   Five days after the award was announced, John Dugdale, the
   associate media editor of The Guardian, wrote a piece that
   asked [69]“Why have women finally started winning science book
   prizes?” You might think: Good question! Women have been
   writing great science books for a long time now. Why haven’t
   [70]more of them been [71]recognized?


   But that’s not why Dugdale asked the question. According to
   him, the Royal Society caved to pressure created by the example
   of another “more female-friendly” prize. His piece suggests
   that the judges’ taste is shifting from “male” approaches to
   science writing that emphasize “a problem, a mystery, or an
   underexplored scientific field,” towards a feminine tendency
   “to focus on people.”


   When the Royal Society first announced the short list, my heart
   both leapt and sunk.  I felt joy seeing my book reckoned one of
   the best of the year, especially by a storied institution like
   the Royal Society.  Then as I looked over the other titles,  I
   was suitably impressed by the competition.  The list included
   two “big” books of the sort often rewarded by prizes, Wulf’s
   and Siddhartha Mukherjee’s The Gene.  Just as formidable, there
   was a daring investigation of a pressing current concern in
   Oliver Morton’s The Planet Remade, along with Tim Birkhead’s
   learned and lovely book on birds’ eggs in The Most Perfect
   Thing, and Jo Marchant’s beautifully written and courageously
   pursued account of mind-body medicine, The Cure.

   Dugdale paints a very different picture of the field. He
   describes Wulf’s book as a kind of soft option, just a
   single-subject biography, the first to win the Royal Society
   prize for almost two decades.  That’s both wrong and obtuse in
   its stereotyping as female what is one of the most basic tools
   almost every non-fiction writer uses.

   As its title suggests, Wulf’s The Invention of Nature is at
   once the biography of Alexander von Humboldt, and an extended
   account of the development of the idea he championed, which
   evolved, Wulf argues, into the modern conception of nature as
   an interrelated whole. That’s what good intellectual
   biographies do: The stuff of life leads to the stuff of
   thought. That Dugdale thinks a biographical approach is somehow
   a peculiarly female pursuit is simply risible, or so it seems
   to this male author of Einstein in Berlin and Newton and the
   Counterfeiter.

   When I read The Invention of Nature, long before it was
   nominated for the Royal Society prize, it was obvious that it
   was a contender for major honors. It was deeply researched and
   reported; it told a fine and little known story; it connected
   the personal to a big idea, and the past to a very pressing
   present-day concern.

   Two of the judges that chose The Invention of Nature [72]have
   already responded [73]to Dugdale’s suggestion that they were
   catspaws to political correctness (my term, not his.) My
   experience as a Pulitzer juror in 2012 offers some insight in
   what goes on in these kinds of judgments. For my two colleagues
   and I, it began not by discussing any individual book. Rather
   we asked ourselves what it meant to be the best book of the
   year.


   In the end we boiled down what we were looking for to two
   central criteria.  The prose had to be beautiful; we wanted a
   book that made art out of words.  And the book had to take us
   somewhere we couldn’t have gone on our own. Scale wasn’t the
   issue, nor topic, nor style or approach; just high craft and a
   view of the world that could carry reader into experiences
   otherwise unavailable to them.

   From there we worked through our boxes, a few hundred books in
   all, and had little trouble cutting the tally down to fifty.
   There was only some agonizing to get to 10. From 10 to five was
   hard, and the last two cuts to get to our final list of three
   titles were agonizing.  I’m still not entirely sure we got it
   right, although I remain proud of our ultimate choices.

   The point for anyone who hasn’t juried a prize is that each
   panel of judges must arrive at a collective vision of
   excellence. The process being human, it’s certainly possible
   for it all to go awry, for consensus to fail, and for odd or
   perhaps merely excessively conventional choices to prevail. But
   in my experience, judges enter this process looking for ways to
   help us recognize great work as we encounter it, and that’s it.

   That’s not to say that the kind of calculation Dugdale
   describes, looking over one’s shoulder at other prizes, or
   trying to make sure a book is the right sort, is impossible.
   That kind of thumb on the scale—along with more flagrant
   sexism—might be one reason that men have so often won major
   prizes. But a claim that the fix was in has to first show that
   only such an inequity can explain an outcome, and Dugdale has
   failed to show that, because he can’t. There were six strong
   candidates for the Royal Society’s prize. Out of those fine
   books, a fine one won.

   In that context Dugdale’s hints at something dodgy in the
   process are more than just wrong; they’re malign, potentially
   damaging to aspirations and careers. The recent debacles of the
   [74]Hugo awards and [75]Gamergate, where in both cases men
   aggrieved at female encroachment on alleged genderless
   meritocracies sought to wall off creative domains suggest how
   much harm these kinds of attacks on female accomplishments can
   be. Discounting a great work at the moment it earns one of
   science writing’s highest honors based on the gender of its
   creator is just one more barrier women science writers have to
   deal with that men don’t.


   But if doing well is the best revenge, then Andrea Wulf can
   hold her head high: As the judges noted, The Invention of
   Nature was their unanimous selection as the best
   popular-science book of the year. As her colleague and
   competitor, I raise my glass in salute.





