February 3rd

                             [Feb3.jpg]
                            Tasha Inniss
                 Associate Professor of Mathematics
                           Spelman College
                   Acting Deputy Division Director
               Division of Human Resource Development
                     National Science Foundation

     Dr. Inniss was born in the amazing city of New Orleans,
     Louisiana. She grew up in a house that her great grandfather
     built in the Lower 9th Ward. In this house, she lived with
     her mother, brother, grandparents, aunt, and uncle. Her home
     of extended family was filled with lots of love and quality
     family time! Sunday dinners, which included in-depth
     discussions about various topics, were the norm.
     Christianity and the Catholic Church were a major part of
     her upbringing. Education was also very important…her mother
     was pursuing a Master’s degree, her aunt a law school
     degree, her uncle was a math professor, and her grandfather
     was a 6th grade teacher. All played a part in raising her
     and nurturing her love and talent for mathematics. Numbers
     and solving problems were always exciting for her. She
     marveled at the fact that it seemed math was part of almost
     everything around her in the world. One of her earliest
     memories was of her grandfather helping her to memorize her
     “times” (multiplication) tables. She got great joy out of
     providing answers in the quickest amount of time…she was a
     whiz at calculations! She also remembers the excitement of
     being called to the board to “expand numbers” or to do long
     division. In 4th grade, she recalls being a finalist at a
     mathematics’ competition at the local college. Talk about a
     confidence booster! She enjoyed the challenge of being
     presented a math problem and tackling it as if it were a
     puzzle or game. This perception of fun and the sense of
     accomplishment she felt after solving a problem correctly
     sustained her interest in the mathematical sciences through
     all the years of her schooling. It was in college at Xavier
     University of Louisiana that she decided to pursue a Ph.D.
     in the mathematical sciences due to the urging of her
     professors. Her proudest accomplishment was earning the
     Ph.D. in Applied Mathematics. She feels she owes this
     accomplishment to her family, friends, teachers, mentors,
     and professors that encouraged, supported and believed in
     her! Pursuing a doctoral degree is not easy for anyone, but
     doing so while combating perceptions of the abilities of
     African Americans made it extra challenging. Because there
     are so few African American women mathematicians, it is
     extra special for her “to be in the number” (no pun intended
     ☺). She feels really good knowing that her accomplishment
     may help other women of color to know that they can do it
     too! That is why she was especially proud to become a math
     professor at Spelman College, where she could mentor and
     encourage other Black women. If she were to give any words
     of advice, it would be these:

   "Have faith! Work Hard! Be courageous and persevere! Be open to

