Sticky cards

   Posted on [23]22 January 2017 by [24]John


   Suppose you shuffle a deck of cards. How likely is it that
   there are two cards that were next to each other before the
   shuffle are still next to each other after the shuffle?

   It depends on how well you shuffle the cards. If you do what’s
   called a “faro shuffle” then the probability of a pair of cards
   remaining neighbors is 0. In a faro shuffle, if the cards were
   originally numbered 1 through 52, the new arrangement will be
   1, 27, 2, 28, 3, 29, …, 26, 52. All pairs are split up.

   But if you shuffle the cards so well that the new arrangement
   is a random permutation of the original, there’s about an 86%
   chance that at least one pair of neighbors remain neighbors. To
   be more precise, consider permutations of n items. As n
   increases, the probability of no two cards remaining
   consecutive converges to exp(-2), and so the probability of at
   least two cards remaining next to each other converges to 1 –
   exp(-2).

   By the way, this considers pairs staying next to each other in
   either order. For example, if the cards were numbered
   consecutively, then either a permutation with 7 followed by 8
   or 8 followed by 7 would count.

   More generally, for large n, the probability of k pairs
   remaining consecutive after a shuffle is 2^ke^-2 / k!.

   One application of this result would be testing. If you
   randomly permute a list of things to break up consecutive
   pairs, it probably won’t work. Instead, you might want to split
   your list in half, randomize each half separately, then
   interleave the two half lists as in the faro shuffle.

   Another application would be fraud detection. If you’re
   suspicious that a supposedly random process isn’t splitting up
   neighbors, you could use the result presented here to calibrate
   your expectations. Maybe what you’re seeing is consistent with
   good randomization. Or maybe not. Note that the result here
   looks at any pair remaining together. If a particular pair
   remains together consistently, that’s more suspicious.

   Related posts:



   Reference: David P. Robbins, The Probability that Neighbors
   Remain Neighbors After Random Rearrangements. The American
   Mathematical Monthly, Vol. 87, No. 2, pp. 122-124
   Categories : [27]Math
   Tags : [28]Math [29]Probability and Statistics
   Bookmark the [30]permalink



