The Arts Are Trying To Help The Math Education Crisis In South Africa

   By Alyssa Robinson • Oct 6, 2016
   [120]Tweet[121]Share[122]Google+[123]Email


   Listen
   Listening...
   /
   4:10

   The Africa Meets Africa project seeks to use cultural heritage,
   art and math to create a curriculum that connects children to
   their elders. The organization from South Africa was in Salt
   Lake City to collaborate with other educators interested in
   using the program in the U.S.

   [124][UPR-70-30-combo-horizontal.png]
   Credit culture24.org.uk


   Helene Smuts, the founder of the Africa Meets Africa, was
   concerned with the under performance of math skills in rural
   kids after finding out a large number of children were failing
   their math courses. She wanted to collaborate with other
   educators, artists and leaders to find a new way to approach
   math education.

   “I was standing in a very small place with a master weaver,
   Zulu Weaver, and I was asking him why the very complex patterns
   in his weaving were working out so sophisticatedly," said
   Smuts. "He would use triangular shapes [and] a range of colors
   in his weaving. My assumption was I suppose he made a drawing.
   And when I asked this question ‘Do you make a drawing before’
   and he laughed at me. And in my mind I could clearly see the
   geometry in his patterns, but the word geometry never signified
   anything to him. And he laughed at me and he said, ‘No, no. As
   I weave I don’t really know how this basket will work out. But
   I count - I count each knot I make. It’s as if my eye has a
   measurement.’"

   Smuts says she found this idea astonishing and wanted to use
   the idea of the geometry she found in art to help the math
   educational crisis her community was experiencing.

   “I heard politicians say things like, ‘Oh it seems like, rural
   kids can’t do math,’" she said. "At that moment something was
   not making sense. I thought if grandmothers at home were doing
   this astonishing sophisticated work in media like beadwork and
   weaving, surely children were exposed to that."

   After this experienced, she founded Africa Meets Africa to help
   train teachers to use different art mediums to teach their
   students math in a hands-on way.

   “This is working because we are linking concrete experience,
   the making experience, with abstract thinking," Smuts said.
   "Somehow we find if someone [is] beading a pattern, they can
   see the mistake they made if it’s not working out. The first
   thing you do is pull out your beads - you unravel. And now
   parallel thinking is happening that some student are
   discovering that if they are getting stuck on a math problem,
   the thing to do is unravel.”

   She also discovered this type of learning is helping with
   concentration.

   “Concentration, you find students who often struggle to sit
   still for four minutes, are sitting there with a piece of
   beadwork sitting there for at least 35 minutes," Smuts said.
   "We are linking concrete experience with abstract thinking and
   the eye and the mind and the eye and the hand and the mind are
   working together.”

   The curriculum emphasizes cultural roots and connecting with
   family and tradition. The holistic teaching practice reaches
   out beyond the child in the classroom.

   “In the past, my child would go home from school and say, 'Ugh
   we can’t [do] this mathematics.' And the parents would say,
   'Well we couldn’t either, neither could your grandparents,’'
   she said. "Now, they’re going home with a piece of beadwork
   they made and they say, 'We did this in school.” Their parents
   would say, ‘Yes your grandmother does that.’ And then the child
   says, ‘But my teacher says this is mathematics, which means
   grandma’s been doing mathematics.'”

   Jackie Scheiber is the developer of the math and art curriculum
   for African Meets African and told me about 6th grade teacher
   Stephanie Flint from Fort Collins, Colorado who is using this
   teaching approach in her class.

   “She was using the beadwork to focus on functions. In the 6th
   grade they look at functions quite simply,"  said Sheiber. "She
   got her people so inspired that they were doing research on
   their own and coming up with equations that you see in the
   learners in the 8th and 9th grade working on. Although it took
   her time to focus on the beadwork. So the time that she spent
   on this was not wasted. ”

   The 15-year-old project plans to explore other cultural mediums
   such as music and dance. For more information including African
   Meets Africa's publications, [125]click here.
   [126]Tweet[127]Share[128]Google+[129]Email


   [130]View the discussion thread.


   UPR Partners













