Student Team Addresses Gerrymandering With Mathematics

   Project develops nonpartisan way to assess the fairness of
   congressional districts
   Students on the Data+ team are looking to quantify the effect
   of gerrymandering on congressional elections.
   Students on the Data+ team are looking to quantify the effect
   of gerrymandering on congressional elections.
   Share this story





   Karen Kemp, Sanford School of Public Policy

   A Duke University research team has applied mathematical
   modeling techniques to develop a novel, nonpartisan way to
   assess the fairness of congressional districts.

   The team led by mathematics professor Jonathan Mattingly found
   that states with independent redistricting commissions, such as
   Iowa, had statistically fairer results than states with
   partisan redistricting systems, such as North Carolina and
   Maryland.

   They also evaluated the districts drawn earlier this fall by a
   mock bipartisan redistricting panel formed by Terry Sanford
   Distinguished Fellow Tom Ross. The “Beyond Gerrymandering”
   project panelists were former North Carolina Supreme Court
   justices and lower court judges.

   In partisan systems, the party that controls the state
   legislature typically draws boundaries to favor its own
   candidates, a practice known as gerrymandering. Politically
   gerrymandered districts have contributed to a congressional
   climate in which only small a fraction of U.S. Representatives
   face serious opposition in most elections.

   “When random districts are drawn and the results of previous
   elections are re-tabulated,” said Mattingly, “the results shed
   light on the ways gerrymandered political boundaries stifle
   disparate political voices. The same voters, arranged into
   different districts, would have produced vastly different
   results.”

   In North Carolina, the research team examined the state’s 2012
   congressional elections, in which Democrats won a majority of
   the popular vote but won just four of North Carolina’s 13
   congressional districts.

   “In our samples, Democrats win five, six and even seven
   congressional districts with far greater frequency than four,
   confirming that the observed outcome is indeed very odd,” the
   research team wrote.

   Initially, Mattingly worked with a team of undergraduate and
   graduate students during the summer of 2015 to analyze the
   congressional redistricting efforts in North Carolina,
   Tennessee, Maryland, New York, Texas, Iowa, Wisconsin and
   Arizona.

   Their process and results are available on a website,
   [17]Quantifying Gerrymandering.


   More recently, a second team developed two indices to
   characterize a state’s congressional districts: An index of
   gerrymandering and an index of representativeness. The first
   measures how packed the districts are. Packing is the act of
   concentrating one party in a few districts to minimize the
   effect of their votes statewide, and tends to create more
   partisan districts. The second index measures how
   representative the results are for a given set of districts
   over a series of elections.

   Using these ideas, Mattingly’s team analyzed maps produced by
   Ross’s “Beyond Gerrymandering” project.

   They compared the outcomes using the mock panel’s map and those
   used in the 2012 and 2016 N.C. congressional elections to the
   hypothetical outcomes of thousands of alternative district
   maps. They found that those produced by the mock panel of
   judges scored much better on the indices of gerrymandering and
   representativeness.

   The alternative maps were drawn using the same criteria that
   guided the creation of the actual maps: Equal populations in
   each district, compactness, number of counties that are split
   into multiple districts, and the share of the minority voting
   age population within the districts.

   Mattingly said the project was intended as a nonpartisan
   demonstration.

   “Our purpose is not to create a panacea for political map
   drawing. Rather, we wanted to provide a nonpartisan, objective
   way of determining which sets of districts are more
   representative and less gerrymandered,” he said.

   Students involved in the project in the summer of 2015 were
   Sachet Bangia, Bridget Dou and Sophie Guo, undergraduates at
   Duke, and Christy Vaughn Graves, now a graduate student at
   Princeton.

   The 2016 team consisted of visiting assistant professor Gregory
   Herschlag, graduate student Robert Ravier and undergraduates
   Justin Luo and Hansung Kang.
   Share this story





   Tagged with
   [22]News Releases & Tips, [23]Research, [24]Faculty,
   [25]Students [26]View all tags



    © 2017 Office of News & Communications
    614 Chapel Drive, Box 90563, Durham, NC 27708-0563(919)
    684-2823

   (BUTTON) ×


