Prediction Process

   To compile their state-by-state projections, both students
   referenced RealClearPolitics, Fivethirtyeight, among other
   resources to examine polling data for individual states. They
   applied additional research and analysis to reach their
   conclusions. Skapura accurately forecasted the victor in 46
   states — all but the battlegrounds of Florida, North Carolina
   and Pennsylvania — and Poynor correctly projected the winning
   candidate in 45 states.

   “For the swing states, I looked at a multitude of polls and
   took three factors into account: the size of the population of
   likely voters, the past accuracy of the poll, and the bias of
   the poll,” said Skapura. “I learned through this process how
   important it is to ensure the polls we use to reach our
   conclusions are rated and ranked by independent sites that
   verify their accuracy. There are many resources available
   online that skew toward one side or the other.”

   For the outcome of the popular vote, which both students
   accurately projected for Clinton, the analysis included a
   review of state predictions, general election polls, and news
   regarding the election. Skapura expected Clinton to draw 48.1%
   of the popular vote to Trump’s 45.8%, while Poynor predicted
   the candidate to win 49.8% to Trump’s 46.1%. As of noon on
   November 10, the official conclusion of the contest judging
   period, Clinton had won 47.7% and Trump had secured 47.4% of
   the popular vote.

   “Coming up with predictions for the popular vote for each
   candidate was much more tedious than that of the state
   predictions,” said Poynor. “My analysis included reading
   multiple articles and predictions on various websites because I
   knew that not one website would have everything right. I
   ultimately took projections from three different websites —
   electionprojection.com, fivethirtyeight.com and ijr.com — and
   averaged those numbers to come up with my answers.”

   In addition to projecting individual state and overall election
   winners, Poynor also predicted a voter turnout of 129,822,350,
   just under the current turnout of 133.9 million.


