U.S. Students Compete in Romanian Math Competition

   While many believe that the toughest high school math contest
   is the International Mathematical Olympiad (IMO), there is one
   contest that students find more challenging: the Romanian
   Master of Mathematics (RMM). This week six American high
   schoolers will compete in one of the most difficult math
   contests in the world in Bucharest, Romania from February
   24–29.

   The U.S. contestants are Celine Liang, Alec Sun, Eshaan
   Nichani, Michael Ma, Junyao Peng, and Calvin Lee, who will be
   competing with 17 other teams representing 16 countries
   (Romania is sending two teams). The U.S. team is led by Coach
   Razvan Gelca, professor of mathematics at Texas Tech
   University, and is accompanied by deputy leader Po-Shen Loh,
   professor of mathematics at Carnegie Mellon University.

   By design, the RMM has harder problems than the IMO, and it is
   very challenging to receive a medal, says Gelca. He points out
   that it is possible that American student could win a bronze
   medal at the RMM, but then go on to win a gold medal at the
   IMO.

   The arduous nature of the RMM make it an ideal training ground
   for IMO hopefuls, says Gelca. That is why only fresh
   competitors, students who have never competed in the IMO, are
   eligible to be on the U.S. team.

   “We see this as an opportunity to give students international
   contest experience and prime them for the international
   Olympiad,” says Gelca.

   The competition is run just like the International Mathematical
   Olympiad: contestants work through six problems over two days.
   The team score is based on the combined highest three
   individual scores. Since the first RMM in 2008, the United
   States has regularly placed in the top three, winning the
   first-place trophy in 2011 and 2013.

   Despite the challenge, Gelca is confident about his team’s
   performance this week. “The U.S. training program is one of the
   best in the world,” he says. “It is the same feeling as going
   to a sports competition and watching the best team play. The
   fact that I interact with [students] who are so talented, so
   intelligent, and so hard working is extraordinary.”

   While the United States chooses to send only contestants who
   have never participated in the IMO before (a choice which is
   not universal across RMM participating countries), about 20
   American students, including those who attended the 2015 IMO,
   will still take the test on their native turf. Because the RMM
   test scores count as a qualifier for the U.S. IMO team,
   students can still take the test and turn in their scores. This
   will ultimately go toward the final selection of the six
   members who will compete in Hong Kong at the 2016 IMO this
   summer.

   About AMC

   The Mathematical Association of America is the largest
   professional society that focuses on mathematics accessible at
   the undergraduate level. The mission of the MAA's [306]American
   Mathematics Competitions is to increase interest in mathematics
   and to develop problem solving through a fun competition.
   Teachers and schools benefit from the chance to challenge
   students with interesting mathematical questions that are
   aligned with curriculum standards at all levels of difficulty.
   News Date:
   Tuesday, February 23, 2016
   Category:
   [307]MAA



