How Praise Became a Consolation Prize

   Helping children confront challenges requires a more nuanced
   understanding of the “growth mindset.”



   Like ​The Atlantic? Subscribe to ​[4]The Atlantic Daily​, our
   free weekday email newsletter.
   ____________________ Sign up
   {{#existing_user}}


   Your newsletter subscription preferences have been updated.
   {{/existing_user}} {{^existing_user}}

   You're almost finished.
   We just need to confirm your email address.
   To complete the subscription process, please click the link in
   the email we just sent you.
   {{/existing_user}}
   An unknown error occurred.

   As a young researcher, Carol Dweck was fascinated by how some
   children faced challenges and failures with aplomb while others
   shrunk back. Dweck, now a psychologist at Stanford University,
   eventually identified two core mindsets, or beliefs, about
   one’s own traits that shape how people approach challenges:
   fixed mindset, the belief that one’s abilities were carved in
   stone and predetermined at birth, and growth mindset, the
   belief that one’s skills and qualities could be cultivated
   through effort and perseverance. Her findings brought the
   concepts of “fixed” and “growth” mindset to the fore for
   educators and parents, inspiring the implementation of her
   ideas among [5]teachers—and even [6]companies—across the
   country.


   But Dweck recently noticed a trend: a widespread embrace of
   what she refers to as “false growth mindset”—a misunderstanding
   of the idea’s core message. Growth mindset’s popularity was
   leading some educators to believe that it was simpler than it
   was, that it was only about putting forth effort or that a
   teacher could foster growth mindset merely by telling kids to
   try hard. A teacher might applaud a child for making an effort
   on a science test even if he’d failed it, for instance,
   believing that doing so would promote growth mindset in that
   student regardless of the outcome. But such empty praise can
   exacerbate some of the very problems that growth mindset is
   intended to counter. A new edition of Dweck’s book, [7]Mindset:
   The New Psychology of Success, updated to address false growth
   mindset, comes out at the end of this month. I recently spoke
   with Dweck about how she wants her ideas to be applied. The
   interview has been lightly edited and condensed for clarity.
     __________________________________________________________


   Christine Gross-Loh: Could you tell me about the development of
   the idea of growth mindset? What was it intended to correct?
   What were you seeing that you felt growth mindset would help
   improve?

   Carol Dweck: I’ve always been interested, since graduate
   school, in why some children wilt and shrink back from
   challenges and give up in the face of obstacles, while others
   avidly seek challenges and become even more invested in the
   face of obstacles. So this has been my primary question for
   over 40 years. At some point, my graduate students and I
   realized that a student’s mindset was at the foundation of
   whether [he or she] loved challenges and persisted in the face
   of failure.

   When students had more of a fixed mindset—the idea that
   abilities are carved in stone, that you have a certain amount
   and that’s that—they saw challenges as risky. They could fail,
   and their basic abilities would be called into question. When
   they hit obstacles, setbacks, or criticism, this was just more
   proof that they didn’t have the abilities that they cherished.

   In contrast, when students had more of a growth mindset, they
   held the view that talents and abilities could be developed and
   that challenges were the way to do it. Learning something new,
   something hard, sticking to things—that’s how you get smarter.
   Setbacks and feedback weren’t about your abilities, they were
   information you could use to help yourself learn. With a growth
   mindset, kids don’t necessarily think that there’s no such
   thing as talent or that everyone is the same, but they believe
   everyone can develop their abilities through hard work,
   strategies, and lots of help and mentoring from others.

   Gross-Loh: When I first interviewed you about growth mindset a
   few years ago, I remember that it was a relatively unknown
   idea. But growth mindset is now so popular that I’ll hear
   people who aren’t steeped in educational theory say, “Praise
   the effort, not the child (or the outcome).” Why do you think
   this idea struck such a chord, and how did you find out there
   were people misunderstanding it?

   “Nobody has a growth mindset in everything all the time.”

   Dweck: Many educators were dissatisfied with drilling for
   high-stakes tests. They understood that student motivation had
   been a neglected area, especially of late. So many educators,
   as well as many parents, were excited to implement something
   that might re-energize kids to focus on learning again, not
   just memorization and test taking, but on deeper, more joyful
   learning.

   But a colleague of mine, Susan Mackie, was doing workshops with
   educators in Australia and observed that many of them were
   saying they got growth mindset and were running with it, but
   did not understand it deeply. She told me, “I’m seeing a lot of
   false growth mindset.” I just did not get it initially—growth
   mindset is a very straightforward concept, and besides, why
   would people settle for a false growth mindset if they could
   have a real one? But I started keeping a list of all the ways
   people were misunderstanding growth mindset. When the list got
   long enough, I started speaking and writing about it.

   Gross-Loh: Could you elaborate on false growth mindset?

   Dweck: False growth mindset is saying you have growth mindset
   when you don't really have it or you don’t really understand
   [what it is]. It’s also false in the sense that nobody has a
   growth mindset in everything all the time. Everyone is a
   mixture of fixed and growth mindsets. You could have a
   predominant growth mindset in an area but there can still be
   things that trigger you into a fixed mindset trait. Something
   really challenging and outside your comfort zone can trigger
   it, or, if you encounter someone who is much better than you at
   something you pride yourself on, you can think “Oh, that person
   has ability, not me.” So I think we all, students and adults,
   have to look for our fixed-mindset triggers and understand when
   we are falling into that mindset.

   I think a lot of what happened [with false growth mindset among
   educators] is that instead of taking this long and difficult
   journey, where you work on understanding your triggers, working
   with them, and over time being able to stay in a growth mindset
   more and more, many educators just said, “Oh yeah, I have a
   growth mindset” because either they know it’s the right mindset
   to have or they understood it in a way that made it seem easy.

   Gross-Loh: Why do you think these misunderstandings occurred?

   Dweck: Many people understood growth mindset deeply and
   implemented it in a very sophisticated and effective way.
   However, there were many others who understood it in a way that
   wasn’t quite accurate, or distilled it down to something that
   wasn’t quite effective, or assimilated it into something they
   already knew.

   Often when we see kids who aren’t learning well, we might feel
   frustrated or defensive, thinking it reflects on us as
   educators. It’s often tempting to not feel it is our fault. So
   we might say the child has a fixed mindset, without
   understanding instead that, as educators, it is our
   responsibility to create a context in which a growth mindset
   can flourish.

   Gross-Loh: So it seems that the danger is that some teachers
   think they have growth mindset and believe it will transfer to
   their students, even though they themselves don’t really
   understand it. How about this: Are there educators who do
   understand the idea that abilities can be developed, but don’t
   understand how to pass it on to students? Are there certain
   children who are more vulnerable to this sort of
   misunderstanding of growth mindset?

   Dweck: Yes, another misunderstanding [of growth mindset] that
   might apply to lower-achieving children is the
   oversimplification of growth mindset into just [being about]
   effort. Teachers were just praising effort that was not
   effective, saying “Wow, you tried really hard!” But students
   know that if they didn’t make progress and you’re praising
   them, it’s a consolation prize. They also know you think they
   can’t do any better. So this kind of growth-mindset idea was
   misappropriated to try to make kids feel good when they were
   not achieving.

   The mindset ideas were developed as a counter to the
   self-esteem movement of blanketing everyone with praise,
   whether deserved or not. To find out that teachers were using
   it in the same way was of great concern to me. The whole idea
   of growth-mindset praise is to focus on the learning process.
   When you focus on effort, [you have to] show how effort created
   learning progress or success.

   Gross-Loh: What should people do to avoid falling into this
   trap?

   Dweck: A lot of parents or teachers say praise the effort, not
   the outcome. I say [that’s] wrong: Praise the effort that led
   to the outcome or learning progress; tie the praise to it. It’s
   not just effort, but strategy … so support the student in
   finding another strategy. Effective teachers who actually have
   classrooms full of children with a growth mindset are always
   supporting children’s learning strategies and showing how
   strategies created that success.

   Students need to know that if they’re stuck, they don’t need
   just effort. You don’t want them redoubling their efforts with
   the same ineffective strategies. You want them to know when to
   ask for help and when to use resources that are available.

   All of this is part of the process that needs to be taught and
   tied to learning.

   “Focus on the learning process and show how hard work, good
   strategies, and good use of resources lead to better learning.”

   Gross-Loh: Is there a right way to praise kids and encourage
   them to do well?

   Dweck: Many parents and teachers who themselves have growth
   mindset aren’t passing it on because they are trying to protect
   the child’s confidence, focus on the child’s ability, and kind
   of boost the child’s view or protect the child from a failure.
   They’re conveying anxiety about ability.

   But we have a new line of research (with my former graduate
   student, Kyla Haimovitz) showing that the way a parent reacts
   to a child’s failure conveys a mindset to a child regardless of
   the parent’s mindset. If parents react to their child’s
   failures as though there is something negative, if they rush
   in, are anxious, reassure the child, “Oh not everyone can be
   good at math, don’t worry, you’re good at other things,” the
   child gets it that no, this is important, and it’s fixed. That
   child is developing a fixed mindset, even if the parent has a
   growth mindset.

   But if the parent reacts to a child’s failure as though it’s
   something that enhances learning, asking, “Okay, what is this
   teaching us? Where should we go next? Should we talk to the
   teacher about how we can learn this better?” that child comes
   to understand that abilities can be developed.

   So, with praise, focus on “process praise”—focus on the
   learning process and show how hard work, good strategies, and
   good use of resources lead to better learning. Be
   matter-of-fact, with not too strong or too passive a reaction.

   You can see evidence of fixed mindset as young as 3.5 or 4
   years old; that’s when mindsets can start becoming evident,
   where some kids are very upset when they make a mistake or get
   criticized and fall into a helpless place. That’s when children
   become able to evaluate themselves. We collaborated … with
   researchers from the University of Chicago who had a
   longitudinal project with videotape of mother-child
   interactions. What we found was the more praise was
   process-oriented—not a ton, just where the greater proportion
   of the praise was process praise [versus outcome praise]—the
   more those children had a growth mindset and a high desire for
   challenge five years later, when they were in second grade.

   Gross-Loh: That’s very helpful to know for parents of young
   children.  But what about older kids who might feel discouraged
   and worn-down after years of feeling that they weren’t smart
   enough or a fear that they would never be able to be
   successful? Is it ever too late to foster a growth mindset in
   students?

   Dweck: No—we’ve developed a number of online workshops
   addressed at adolescents and shown that when we teach [those]
   students a growth mindset, many of them regain their motivation
   to learn and achieve higher grades, especially students who
   have been struggling or students who have been laboring under a
   negative stereotype about [their own] abilities.

   Research conducted last year by my former graduate student,
   David Yeager [now a professor at the University of Texas], on
   18,000 students entering ninth grade, shows us that students
   who took growth-mindset workshops are seeking more challenges.

   You can’t tell adolescents, “We’re adults, we have the answer,
   and we’re going to tell you what it is.” So we said, “We’re
   scientists from Stanford University and the University of
   Texas, and we need your help. We’re experts on the brain and
   how students learn, but you’re the experts on being a freshman
   in high school and we’d like your input for a program we’re
   developing for future freshmen.”

   We then taught them about how the teenage brain is especially
   open to learning. We talked about how it’s a time of great
   plasticity, a time they need to take advantage of, and that
   they can grow their brains through taking on hard tasks in
   school and sticking to them. We had the students write a letter
   to a struggling freshman, counseling that person in terms of
   the growth-mindset principle, which is often very persuasive.
   We had testimonials from some public figures, talking about how
   a growth mindset got them to where they were.

   Finally we talked about why someone would want a growth
   mindset. We realized that some kids would be overjoyed to hear
   you can develop your intellectual abilities, but others might
   not think it was the most exciting thing. So we then had a
   whole section on why you might want to develop your mind.
   Teenagers are really excited about the idea that they can do
   something to make the world a better place. So we asked them
   what they want to make their contribution to in the
   future—family, community, or societal problems—and then talked
   about how having a strong mind could help them make their
   future contribution.

   We’re excited about this because we know the world of the
   future is going to be about taking on ill-defined, hard jobs
   that keep changing. It’s going to favor people who relish those
   challenges and know how to fix them. We are committed to
   creating a nation of learners.


