Reflections, 20 years Later, on A Declaration of the Independence of
Cyberspace

   By John Perry Barlow

   Does Cyberspace Exist? Is It Free?

   report this ad

   report this ad

   Twenty years ago tonight, I was at a staff party for the
   closing of the World Economic Forum, lured there by a coven of
   the contemporary geishas that staffed the Forum in those days,
   composed largely of doctoral students in Foreign Affairs at the
   University of Geneva. But I had also agreed to write something
   about that moment for a book called 24 Hours in Cyberspace.
   This was a slightly silly proposition, given that it was
   largely a book of photographs, and a photograph has yet to be
   taken of anything in Cyberspace.

   But one of the photographs destined for the book was taken on a
   primitive digital camera by Tipper Gore as Bill Clinton signed
   into law the Communications Decency Act, a wholly futile piece
   of legislation that proposed at $250,000 fine on anyone
   uttering online any of seven words I have never failed to hear
   every time I was a guest in the Senate Members Dining Room.

   The bill was a sweeping assertion of powers that were
   unconstitutional in the U.S. and utterly without legal basis
   anywhere else in the world.

   So, facing a deadline, and filled with a gathering sense of
   indignation not only at the Communications Decency Act, but at
   the many bland assertions I’d heard at the WEF about regulating
   and controlling the Internet, I decided to write a manifesto
   declaring the natural anti- sovereignty of the global social
   space I had started calling Cyberspace seven years earlier.

   Like the people in Congress who had passed the Communications
   Decency Act, few of the powerful men at the WEF had ever been
   online or had much interest in getting there. They had
   secretaries who typed. It wasn’t just that they were clueless
   about the Internet. They were dynamically anti-clueful and took
   it as a badge of honor. 1996 was the first year the Internet
   became a topic of interest at the WEF and they’d brought in a
   few wired types like myself, mostly as curiosities and
   certainly as part of the entertainment. Dancing bears would
   have been cheaper and probably more entertaining.

   So I had few illusions about how many representatives of the
   Powers that Had Been were going to quake at any broadside I
   might write at that moment. But that wasn’t why I wanted to
   write it. I wanted to write it because it needed to be said,
   whether anyone from the “weary giants” ever read or understood
   it.

   So I decided, in the middle of this fabulous, glittering party,
   that I would use the opportunity to declare – on my own
   authority, representing no one but myself – my conviction that
   Cyberspace, the fast-blooming organism of all connected
   thought, was already free and already independent. It was not a
   freedom we had to wrest from some King. It was a freedom we’d
   had all along, based on the simple lack of enforceable
   jurisdiction and the inherently open architectural design of
   the Internet.

   What I felt compelled to declare was pretty simple really.

   First, I wanted to declare that no government, neither ours nor
   Saudi Arabia’s, had the authority, much less the ability to
   tell the “people of Cyberspace,” that global constituency who
   already identified with the design, creation, and defense of
   the still larval Internet, what they might express online. Even
   in those many parts of the world that didn’t share America’s
   purported values regarding freedom of expression, privacy,
   prior restraint, unreasonable search and seizure, etc. there
   were still not many who were ready to cede to the United States
   such moral authority without legal standing.

   Second, I wanted to make clear my belief that Authority,
   heretofore God-given down a long white column with the Almighty
   on top and you on the bottom, was about become something that
   could only be derived from a horizontally networked consensus,
   since in most cases there’d be no practical way to impose it
   hierarchically.

   I admit that, coming from Wyoming, where unwritten social
   contracts seem to work pretty well, I was susceptible to the
   view that in the absence of credible law, such “organic”
   methods of self-regulation of might develop in the online
   world. To some degree, they have. In most ways, they have not.
   As the entire Human Race came online, including the very worst
   of us, it was naïve of me to think that the Russian Mob (or the
   Russian Government, for that matter) was going to have much
   truck with consensus systems aimed at the commonweal.

   But it was late, I was in a hurry, and there always seemed to
   be a pretty girl next to me pouring another glass of champagne.
   So I wrote a number of things I might not have written in a
   cold, gray dawn. This probably also accounts for my decision to
   imitate the grandiloquent literary style of a notorious
   slave-holder like Thomas Jefferson. (For which I took endless
   grief from Post-Modernists all over Europe.)

   Third, I felt a need to make clear that the whole notion one
   could own free speech was going to be very hard to perpetuate
   in any environment where anybody could perfectly reproduce
   anything humans make with their minds and distribute it
   infinitely at zero cost. Since the desire to share cool stuff
   is a human impulse just this side of sex, it didn’t seem likely
   to me that harsh laws, all of them local, were going to keep
   people from sharing everything from songs to mathematical
   theorems across Cyberspace. And I could see that the primary
   tool of censorship was going to be copyright law and not such
   stalking horses as kiddy porn and terrorism.

   As I wrote the piece between dances, I received substantive
   help from Mike Nelson, which was ironic in that Mike was at the
   time the Clinton Administration’s Main Man on Internet matters.
   Finally, he was getting a chance to support me rather than
   debate me over positions with which he secretly agreed.

   Eventually, I just hit “send” and dispatched the piece to the
   editors of 24 Hours in Cyberspace (who found it too
   controversial to include in their coffee table book). In
   addition, I sent it out the next day to the 600 or so friends I
   had with e-mail addresses.

   And then I had my first experience with online virality. With a
   couple of days I was receiving supportive e-mails by the
   megabyte from all over the planet. At the end of a month, it
   appeared, using the primitive tools of the day, to be on at
   least 10,000 Internet sites. I had apparently spoken for
   somebody.

   And then my Declaration largely faded from general
   consciousness, though it has been perennially fashionable for
   representatives of the Old Order to trot it out as an example
   of the sort of wooly- headed hippie thinking we could entertain
   in more innocent times, but certainly not now with all these
   Boogie Men cavorting online, whether ISIL, Pirate Bay,
   Anonymous, and leakers of all sorts. Most of the excellent
   personages who hold it up for ridicule have either not read it
   or still failed to understand it when they did. And thus they
   might be forgiven for not knowing what it said.

   Or checking it for accuracy. And while there were things I
   might have done differently had I thought I was going have to
   defend it to the end of my days, nonetheless, I will stand by
   it still.

   I do not believe that the Nation State, for all its efforts to
   bring the Net to heel, has really succeeded.

   It is still the case that if one is reasonably savvy
   technically, he or she can express whatever they wish without
   fear of reprisal. But what about China, you will sputter? Well,
   in my experience, the actual relationship between China and the
   Internet is much more nuanced and complex than appears through
   our media. The Chinese government isn’t stupid. They don’t want
   to deny their smartest people access to our smartest people,
   even as they attempt to insert enough “capacitance” into their
   version of the Internet to prevent the formation of another
   Great Cultural Revolution online.

   What about NSA surveillance, you ask? Given that even the NSA
   is now calling for more powerful and generalized use of
   encryption to protect American systems from foreign mischief.
   And the State Department is one of the most effective
   proponents of distributing tools to assure anonymity to
   dissidents in the Middle East and elsewhere.

   Actually, things have turned out rather as I expected they
   might 20 years ago. The War between the Control Freaks and the
   Forces of Open-ness, whether of code, government, or
   expression, remains the same dead heat it’s been stuck on all
   these years.

   Which is enough to make me believe that my vision of an
   Internet that will one day convey to every human mind the Right
   to Know all that curiosity might propel them toward, a “world
   where anyone, anywhere may express his or her beliefs, no
   matter how singular, without fear of being coerced into silence
   or conformity.”

   Please read [16]A Declaration of the Independence of
   Cyberspace, and judge for yourself. It holds up.




   Image and video courtesy John Perry Barlow


