Transcript

   The interactive transcript could not be loaded.

   Loading...

   Loading...
   Rating is available when the video has been rented.
   This feature is not available right now. Please try again
   later.
   (BUTTON)

   Published on Oct 8, 2016

   In this video I tell you about Klein bottle Rubik’s cubes,
   Torus Rubik's Cubes and Klein Quadric Rubik's cubes as an
   introduction to a whole new universe of twisty puzzles.
   Get your own Klein bottle Rubik’s cube, as well as more than
   800 other topological twisty puzzles by downloading the free
   incredibly powerful Rubik’s cube simulator MagicTile by Roice
   Be one of the select few to get your name recorded in our
   limited edition Mathologer "Klein bottle Rubik Cube Hall of
   Fame" by solving the tricky puzzle and following this link:
   To get some help with this challenge check out the second part
   of this video on Mathologer 2 in which I talk about the
   MagicTile interface, show you how to design and record
   algorithms as macro moves, as well as talk you through a
   complete solution of one of the easy Harlequin edge-turning
   puzzles (featuring the all-time simplest three-piece cycle
   algorithm as well as some cute parity problems):
   Also check out the following videos for more background
   information.
   "A simple trick to design your own solutions to Rubik’s cubes":
   (for an introduction to designing your own algorithms for
   solving twisty puzzles)
   A mirror paradox, Klein bottles and Rubik's cubes:
   (An introduction to what Klein bottles are all about and a bit
   of fun with putting Rubik’s cubes INTO Klein bottles.)
   Cracking the 4D Rubik's Cube with simple 3D tricks:
   (Your next challenge after the the Klein Bottle Rubik's cube.
   Another hall of fame awaits.)
   An animation by Jos Leys that shows how the Klein Quadric gets
   glued together from the patch of 24 regular 7-gons in the
   hyperbolic plane.
   Enjoy!
   Burkard



   (BUTTON) Show more (BUTTON) Show less

   Loading...

   Autoplay When autoplay is enabled, a suggested video will
   automatically play next. [X]


