Monday, March 6, 2017

The Best Picks From Mircea Pitici

   [9][j10953.gif]
   "The main message of this series is that there is a lot more to
   mathematics than formulas and learning by rote -- a lot more
   than the stringency of proof and the rigor usually associated
   with mathematics (and held so dear by mathematicians).
   Mathematics has interpretative sides with endless
   possibilities, many made manifest by writing in natural
   language."
   -- Mircea Pitici in the book's Introduction
   When I began math-blogging almost 7 years ago I worried whether
   I could possibly find enough popular math material to blog
   about for more than a few months. In addition to the Web
   itself, Mircea Pitici’s yearly “[10]Best Writing on
   Mathematics” volume is a great reminder of just how much
   accessible math there is! Popular math not only doesn’t get old
   or constraining, it seems to be growing in leaps and bounds.
   Every year I end up saying ‘this year’s edition [of Pitici's
   effort] seems like the best one yet.’ And so it does (this is
   the 7th in the series). It is beautifully-produced (from
   Princeton University Press), on high-grade paper, with
   excellent illustrations, layout, and production values, in
   addition to a fine, varied selection of contributions.
   The downside is, you pay for all that: I’m afraid the retail
   price of $32.95 (for a paperback) may hurt sales compared to
   prior years… time will tell (and of course depending where you
   get it, many/most won’t pay the full retail price).
   It's nice to see how many entries this year come from pieces
   either on the internet or at least from folks with a solid
   presence on the Web; an indication of how much GREAT math
   content is now freely available to millions of people via their
   computers. So if you follow the math blogosphere or
   Twitterverse several of these contributors will be very
   familiar to you:
   Andrew Gelman
   Erica Klarreich
   Kevin Hartnett
   David Castelvecchi
   Brian Hayes
   Tanya Khovanova
   David Richeson
   Steven Strogatz
   Australian mathematician Burkard Polster ([11]"Mathologer" on
   YouTube) gains the distinction of having 2 selections in this
   volume!
   …and the volume ends with Ian Stewart somewhat recursively
   writing about how to write a popular math book.
   …Just some of the 30 authors in this year’s edition.
   As usual, the anthology is a mix of pure and applied math, and
   philosophy and history, as well as some pieces for more serious
   mathematicians beyond a general audience. Big data, education,
   statistics/probability, art, physics, are included along the
   way.
   Also, as usual, I’ll warn the reader that due to publication
   lag time, these pieces are actually from 2015, so if you're
   disappointed to find some favorite 2016 article missing, wait
   for NEXT year’s edition and check again.
   As always, Pitici is impressive with the eclectic diversity of
   his choices for inclusion. Any other mathematician taking on
   the task would likely come up with a very different volume than
   Pitici has… but that’s simply a testament to how much good
   material is available to choose from. Also, one of the best
   aspects of the volume is Pitici’s extensive listing of notable
   books from the prior year, as well as articles that were not
   chosen for inclusion, but nonetheless worthy of mention...
   i.e., this volume can lead to a whole lot further reading if
   one so chooses.
   Last year’s edition had somewhat of an emphasis on recreational
   math (unlike prior editions), while Pitici notes that
   thematically many of this year’s picks “refer to the dynamic
   tension between the object and the practice of ‘pure’ versus
   ‘applied’ mathematics.”
   A few favorite pieces are Erica Klarreich’s on “the Monster
   Group,” Davide Castelvecchi’s on Mochizuki’s confounding
   “proof” of the ABC conjecture, and Jorge Almeida’s on “Lottery
   Perception.” Jennifer Quinn’s entry on combinatorics is an
   especially fun, creative read. There are several historical
   pieces, with John Stillwell’s wide-ranging offering, “What Does
   Depth Mean In Mathematics” perhaps being the most interesting.
   Also, two back-to-back entries offer very different views (pro
   and con) of the reforms of Common Core.
   The anthology does not have to be read from beginning to end;
   the reader can jump around, but several successive pieces do
   hang together around a topic, and may be best read together.
   I thought Derek Abbott’s “The Reasonable Ineffectiveness of
   Mathematics,” which appears fourth in the book’s lineup, might
   have been a more effective lead-off piece, as a somewhat
   contrary, thought-provoking read, arguing against Platonism and
   against the effectiveness of mathematics... a stand not often
   seen (I didn't find him convincing, but at least interesting
   and provocative). I also quite enjoyed Pitici's Introduction to
   this year's volume, so don't just skip over that.
   Other entries cover wide-ranging, unpredictable topics, very
   clearly written, and each reader will find their own favorites.
   Congratulations to Dr. Pitici on another job well-done, and to
   Princeton University Press for a very handsome edition that
   will please most anyone with a strong interest in 'the queen of
   the sciences.' Meanwhile, I saw so many fantastic math pieces
   last year I'm already anxious for Mircea's 2017 edition!
   Posted by [12]"Shecky Riemann" at [13]7:30 AM
   [14]Email This[15]BlogThis![16]Share to Twitter[17]Share to
   Facebook[18]Share to Pinterest
   Labels: [19]books, [20]Mircea Pitici



