Temple mathematician Chelsea Walton named a 2017 Sloan Research
Fellow

   Walton joins colleagues from Stanford, Princeton and MIT in
   receiving this prestigious honor.

   Chelsea Walton standing in front of a blackboard full of math
   equations
   Photography By:
   Ryan Brandenberg
   Chelsea Walton, a 2017 Sloan Foundation Research Fellow,
   specializes in noncommutative algebra.

   The Alfred P. Sloan Foundation named Temple mathematician
   Chelsea Walton [42]a 2017 Research Fellow, putting her in
   company with academicians from Stanford University,
   Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Princeton University.
   The highly competitive and prestigious honor identifies rising
   scientists who’ve made significant marks on their field and
   represent the next generation of leaders in the U.S. and
   Canada.
   "Our department knew that Chelsea's research is competitive for
   a Sloan award," said Irina Mitrea, chair of mathematics at
   Temple.  "She's a leader in her field. Her mathematical
   breakthroughs appeared in high quality publications and they
   had immediate and significant scientific impact, nationally and
   internationally."
   One of those breakthroughs proved a conjecture in the theory of
   rings that had been unresolved for over 20 years; this was
   achieved in collaboration with Susan Sierra of the University
   of Edinburgh.
   Walton’s work on such algebraic structures is part of her
   larger exploration of the field of noncommutative algebra. She
   explains that in noncommutative algebra, multiplication doesn’t
   behave as expected. “That is, a ｘ b doesn’t have to be b ｘ a.
   This occurs more often than one might think because functions
   are naturally noncommutative,” she says. “Wash your clothes
   first and then dry them; you’ll get a different result if you
   dry your clothes first and then wash them. Or consider the
   order that you put on pieces of clothes— performing this in a
   different order produces very different appearances!”
   Unlike the work of some applied mathematicians and scientists,
   her discoveries are in the  realm of theory, so her work might
   not be used for years or even centuries. This used to bother
   her, but only for a brief period. She soon came to understand
   its value.
   “It’s OK if something doesn’t have an immediate application,”
   she said. “Take ethics, for instance, and how it has been
   formalized in various ways and settings (such as workplace
   codes of ethics) centuries after the original theories were
   posed. Very important ideas appearing in society and in nature
   first take root in theory— they could take off in practice
   later or perhaps just remain in our dreams. I’m perfectly fine
   with the latter.”
   I feel like I’m serving a greater good here.
   -- Chelsea Walton, mathematician
   Walton has loved math since childhood. When her mother gave her
   a children’s dictionary, she counted all the As, and then the
   Bs, eventually marking up the whole book to make a frequency
   table of letters. She also enjoyed logic puzzles. In high
   school she learned that she could make math her career and from
   there worked with a number of renowned mentors and colleagues
   at universities across the United States and abroad.
   A 2011 recipient of a PhD in mathematics from the University of
   Michigan, Walton has presented her research widely, including
   at the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute in Berkeley,
   California. She comes to Temple from the Massachusetts
   Institute of Technology, where she was a National Science
   Foundation-funded postdoctoral fellow.
   Walton joined Temple’s faculty in 2015 as a Selma Lee Bloch
   Brown Professor of Mathematics. She was drawn by the unusual
   number of experts in noncommutative algebra at Temple: five
   including her and a postdoctoral fellow. And she loves
   Philadelphia. She says the culture and its ‘straight talk’
   remind her of her hometown, Detroit.
   Of Temple’s campus and student body, Walton said she loves
   looking around and seeing so many different faces. “I feel like
   I’m serving a greater good here.”
   Diversity and increasing it in her field is a major focus for
   Walton. She helps organize a mathematical conference for women
   and teaches in programs designed to interest more young women
   in pursuing research in mathematics.
   Walton is the fourth African-American Sloan Fellow in
   mathematics since the award’s inception in 1955. She’s the
   first Sloan Fellow at Temple since 1989, when Lee-Yuan Liu-Chen
   was honored for neuroscience.
   Walton plans to use the $60,000 grant from the fellowship to
   fund her travel for research  as well as the research expenses
   of her post-doctoral fellow and her graduate and undergraduate
   students and mentees.
   “We are honored to have Chelsea Walton as a colleague,” said
   Michael L. Klein, dean of the College of Science and Technology
   and Laura H. Carnell Professor of Science. “She is a truly
   gifted scholar who exemplifies the creative brilliance of the
   college's recent faculty hires. They are all very talented
   researchers, who, like Chelsea, are recognized as leaders in
   their fields.”
   - [43]Eryn Jelesiewicz
   Related Stories

       wins award for research on fantasy sports

       [47]Experts tally unprecedented appearances in ‘New York
       Times’

       Temple Hospital.
       [49]Faculty join city task force to fight opioid crisis


   Temple University

   Strategic Marketing & Communications

   Bell Building
   1101 W. Montgomery Avenue
   Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA




















   Temple Now: The official source for Temple news.
   Copyright 2015, Temple University. All rights reserved.


