Why STEM Majors Need the Humanities

   By Neal Koblitz January 06, 2017

   When I was a freshman, half a century ago, I asked one of my
   professors — an eminent mathematician named Lars Ahlfors — for
   advice on my academic program. As a budding mathematician, I
   knew about a lot of math courses I should take and some physics
   courses as well. I asked what other courses in math and science
   I should include in my program. Ahlfors replied, "Don’t take
   more courses in those subjects. Once you get to graduate
   school, you’ll be studying nothing but mathematics. Now is your
   chance to become well-educated. Study literature, history, and
   foreign languages."

   I sometimes repeat this story to my students and hope that the
   message is not drowned out by what they might be hearing from
   parents, friends, and the media.

   The weakening of liberal-arts traditions and the
   corporatization of higher education are on the minds of many of
   us. Particularly ominous is the nationwide trend toward
   education-on-the-cheap in our entry-level courses. This takes
   two forms. First, more and more undergraduate courses are being
   taught online. This might be good for the institution’s bottom
   line, but in most cases it is not good for the student, whose
   learning and whose college experience are being diminished.

   Second, introductory courses are increasingly being taught by
   adjuncts, graduate students, and second-tier teaching faculty.
   The result is to transform the first (and sometimes second)
   year of college into an extension of high school, lower the
   intellectual level of introductory courses in both humanities
   and STEM fields, and create further distance between students
   and the world of research and innovation.

   The argument against replacing the liberal-arts tradition with
   a narrow vocationalism is usually phrased in purely humanistic
   terms — the importance of educating the whole person, the need
   for a broadly informed citizenry, and so on. Often overlooked
   is that for STEM majors, as much as for other future
   professionals, a broad background in the humanities is likely
   to give them a tremendous advantage in their career.

   A good piece of technical work is part of a narrative that has
   a long plot line and a large cast of characters.
   With few exceptions, in order for people in the STEM
   professions to have an impact, they must be able to write
   effectively and creatively. Let me illustrate with examples
   from my own field, mathematics applied to information security.
   Forty years ago, at the dawn of the computer age, the Institute
   of Electrical and Electronics Engineers published an article,
   "[69]New Directions in Cryptography," that is arguably the most
   important paper in the history of cryptography. Written by two
   broadly educated computer scientists, Whitfield Diffie and
   Martin E. Hellman, the article had an impact that was due not
   primarily to its technical content, impressive though that was,
   but rather to the authors’ ability to articulate a vision for
   the future internet that can still be read today as a guide to
   some basic principles of cybersecurity.


   Another example is the recent book Weapons of Math Destruction:
   How Big Data Increases Inequality and Threatens Democracy, by
   Cathy O’Neil, a Harvard math Ph.D. who deftly translates her
   expertise in mathematical modeling into a series of stories
   that sound the alarm about the use of mathematics to
   intimidate, mislead, and mistreat millions of people.

   But what about rank-and-file scientists and engineers, who have
   more-modest attainments than Diffie and Hellman and write for a
   much smaller readership than O’Neil? For us as well, success in
   achieving our objectives often depends on the ability to tell a
   story.

   For example, our journal articles will reach a wider audience
   if the introduction is an engaging narrative that proceeds from
   statement of the problem, explanation of its importance, and
   summary of prior work to an overview of the paper’s
   contributions and directions for future research. Grant
   applications will have a better chance of success if they
   convey one’s technical accomplishments in language that gives
   context, history and direction, and does not lose sight of the
   forest for the trees. And if we want to influence a decision on
   a scientific or technological controversy, either in our work
   or as a citizen writing an op-ed for the local newspaper, we
   must broaden our focus and write with a perspective that will
   make sense to diverse groups of people.

   The common element in all of this is knowing how to tell a
   story. Contrary to popular misconceptions about science and
   technology, a good piece of technical work is not a disembodied
   sequence of formulas and calculations, but rather is part of a
   narrative that has a long plot line and a large cast of
   characters.

   Story-telling is a fundamental part of being human, from the
   time we are little children. It is also a central part of many
   cultural traditions, as we see, for example, in Patricia Hill
   Collins’s writings about the experiences of African-American
   women.

   How can a student learn to tell a story well? First and
   foremost, by reading great literature. Another way students can
   learn how to analyze content and trace the development of an
   idea is through the study of history. And finally, one of the
   most effective ways to acquire a broad perspective and an
   appreciation for the nuances of communication is through the
   study of foreign languages and literatures. (I double-majored
   in mathematics and Russian language and literature when I was
   an undergraduate.)


