Inquiry and Equity

   Posted on [15]March 3, 2017 by [16]Brian Katz


   Education is, at its heart, about justice. It is the
   institution that empowers individuals to improve the conditions
   around them, to be intentional and involved citizens, to live
   meaningful and fulfilling lives. Or at least it should.

   Cultural institutions like education can also be the mechanisms
   through which individuals are indoctrinated into a system that
   has power over them, in other words, school can be a tool of
   oppression. We, the community of mathematicians and mathematics
   educators, have been complicit in this oppression for years. We
   have taught students that experts are the source of
   mathematical knowledge/understanding/skill and that their
   mathematical thinking is valid only to the extent that it
   mimics our own. Our classrooms teach them that mathematical
   competence is rare, that this competence is a good proxy for
   intelligence, that this intelligence is determined at birth
   (and rarer by demographics), and that general power in our
   society comes from this intelligence and the financial
   compensation it can command. Our culture validates this rarity
   by suggesting that power should be concentrated in the hands of
   a few, that abdicating this power is normal and happier than
   the alternative.

   In short, our discipline has denied almost every member of our
   society access to mathematical inquiry. In the words of Paulo
   Freire, “any situation in which some [people] prevent others
   from engaging in the process of inquiry is one of violence;… to
   alienate humans from their own decision making is to change
   them into objects” [Pedagogy_of_the_oppressed.jpg] (Pedagogy of
   the Oppressed). I design my courses from a perspective of
   inquiry-based learning (IBL) because I think it offers a chance
   for students to take back this power, to stop and reverse some
   of this violence (see [17]AMS T&LM and [18]DAoM). Friends and
   colleagues, including Aditya Adiredja, Jess Ellis, and
   Christine Andrews-Larson, have articulated important critiques
   and qualifications on this sweeping claim that I will think,
   read, and write about soon.


   Instead, I would like to turn the lens of equity onto the
   community of educators who teach with inquiry. There are many
   paths to this work. Some of us developed our approach to
   teaching in relative isolation , as was the case for me. Some
   learned from and with local colleagues. Some come from the long
   and rich K-12 tradition that uses a different language to
   express very similar values. Some read about Socrates, Dewey,
   and Freire. Some come from mathematics education research.
   Others had heard about teaching with inquiry and sought out
   professional development experiences and supports. Regardless
   of our paths, I think all of us are happy and relieved to know
   that there are others like us.

   I think of the IBL community as the union of the people in the
   threads represented by these various paths. This community has
   mapped itself partially onto various formal organizations,
   including the Academy of Inquiry-Based Learning, the
   Educational Advancement Foundation, a special interest group of
   the MAA called IBL SIGMAA, and many others. Having multiple
   organizations that meet diverse needs should be positive, in
   theory, but that is not what has happened historically.

   One approach to teaching with inquiry is attributed to Robert
   Lee Moore; the thread associated with Moore is highly visible
   partially because of the position that Moore and his students
   held in the national mathematical societies and partially
   because of  generous financial contributions given in support
   of community building. As a result, sometimes this thread in
   the community is equated with the entire community in some
   parts of our discipline. However, Moore’s courses were
   explicitly unwelcoming to some students because he advocated
   racist, misogynistic, and anti-Semitic views about who belongs
   in mathematics in general and his classrooms in particular.

   Combining the two previous paragraphs, this means that
   educators who found ways to offer their students experiences
   with mathematical inquiry either had to deal with joining a
   (large sub-)community that was named after a bigot or forego
   many of the resources offered by this community. Certainly some
   people participated in this community without being aware of
   the bigotry, as was the case with me for several years. Others
   participated with knowledge because they wanted to spread parts
   of Moore’s “legacy” while rejecting the bigotry. However, it is
   an extraordinary privilege to go through the world unaware of
   structural inequality or participating in institutions
   selectively like this.

   Unsurprisingly then, the attachment of Moore’s name to an
   educational movement/community has erected a barrier that keeps
   people without that privilege from benefiting from this
   community’s resources, [19]further expanding the privilege gap.
   The nature of this privilege has the impact of nearly silencing
   the voices that are repelled from this community by Moore’s
   name, but awareness of this privilege has been growing. In a
   talk at JMM 2017, Sandra Laursen laid out a powerful case,
   based on recent research, that Moore’s name is a barrier to the
   spread of inquiry in our classrooms, even as this community has
   increasingly emphasized equity issues for our students and a
   “[20]big tent” interpretation of inquiry for educators.


   IFRAME:
   =1&autohide=2&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&wmode=tr
   ansparent


   I encourage you to read the paper on which this talk is based
   as well as several response pieces from various positions in
   relation to this community, all of which are hosted [22]here.


   I am a person who has benefited from these privileges and the
   resources of this community, so I would like to finish by
   talking about my plans for responding to this inequity. I will,
   of course, write about this responsibility from my own
   perspective; I do so publicly in order to make myself more
   accountable to this plan and to open myself to critique and
   feedback. I’ve organized these thoughts in increasing
   complexity, from symbolic gestures to deep and sustained change
   of the IBL community.

   I make these plans as an individual, but I plan to make use of
   my privileges and positions to accomplish the work. In
   particular, I am currently the chair of the recently-formed
   [23]IBL SIGMAA (special interest group of the MAA), which is a
   mapping of the IBL community onto the MAA.


   (1) Rejecting our inequitable past (and present).
       Zach Haberler and Chuck Hayward, linked above. I have tried
       to make the need for the rejection of Moore’s legacy of
       bigotry personal by comparing it to my more contemporary
       experiences of homophobia.

       rejects the bigotry connected to some of the threads of the
       evolving IBL community that it seeks to represent.
       Furthermore, the IBL SIGMAA charter makes equity a guiding
       principle rather than a peripheral outcome.
       name, but I agree that without his name, it is easier for
       those of us with privilege to forget about this history
       [25](as discussed here). I don’t think I understand what it
       will take to reject this past without forgetting it.

       narratives that frame the strand within this community
       associated with Moore as the canonical, central, real, or
       major form of teaching with inquiry and thereby making the
       experiences and expertise of other educators invisible or
       less valid. I certainly need to work to learn about inquiry
       that has been happening outside my field of vision so far.
       I thank [26]Debra Borkovitz and others for pushing me on
       this aspect.


   While writing statements and passing resolutions is important,
   we could just be shouting these words into the void of the
   internet.

   (2) Removing barriers to accessing the resources of (my segment
   of) the IBL community.
       Moore and his legacy that helped build community among IBL
       practitioners. I think it is essential that there be such a
       conference, but attending it must not require educators to
       contend with a symbol of bigotry. I am happy to announce
       that the IBL SIGMAA and the Educational Advancement
       Foundation, in collaboration with the MAA, are hosting a
       mini-conference inside MathFest this summer entitled
       “Constructing the Future of IBL”. My hope is that the IBL
       SIGMAA will soon host a stand-alone, sustainable, annual
       conference that is easily accessible to all who are
       interested.
       often involves additional barriers such as time and money.
       Travel can be particularly hard on some people, including
       parents and people who are differently able. I commit to
       engaging these barriers to participation as part of my
       reform agenda. Two efforts that are underway: (i) making
       sure that funding sources are reserved to help support
       people who are less able to pay for the costs of travel and
       registration and (ii) making sure that IBL workshops and
       community networks are seeded in various locations so that
       interested instructors don’t need to travel to participate.
       who wish to teach with inquiry that are freely available.
       However, many of these are invisible or inaccessible unless
       you are already plugged into this community. One of the
       main functions of the IBL SIGMAA will be to build and
       maintain a list of these resources and how to access them.
       Moving away from Moore’s name is important for this effort
       because it removes the barrier of having to already know
       this name to find these resources.
       are important. Many instructors face institutional
       pressures that resist their efforts to teach with inquiry.
       As a member of a community that has coalesced to engage
       these pressures, I feel responsible for helping others with
       their efforts. This is especially true if some of the
       pressure comes from an awareness of the history of bigotry
       that has been connected to these efforts.

   Of course, removing Moore’s name from this conference is, at
   best, opening a door, but it does nothing to critique or change
   the community it named. Without this critique, the ideas above
   become a form of colonialism powered by (white) saviorism and
   (white) guilt.

   (3) Supporting the evolution of the IBL community into
   something more equitable.
       there was a focus on lineage (how the speaker was descended
       from Moore, intellectually) and purity (how closely aligned
       they were with Moore’s approach, and how rigorous/strict
       were their expectations). I found these foci off-putting to
       say the least; had I been aware of the connection to
       racism, discussions of lineage and purity would probably
       have driven me away immediately. I am happy to report that
       more recently, the focus has shifted to evidence-based
       practices and decision-making and the goals have shifted
       towards equitable outcomes. My personal sense is that this
       community will continue to evolve as discussions of the
       “definition” of IBL connects us more deeply with RUME
       (research on undergraduate mathematics education),
       especially in terms of theoretical perspectives and
       grounding. The 2017 RUME conference contained a large
       amount of discussion of IBL, especially its connection to
       equity for students. Moreover, these shifts away from
       lineage mean that anyone who does the work has access to
       IBL expertise through these perspectives. I would also like
       to facilitate further connections between IBL SIGMAA and
       RUME SIGMAA members, possibly by scheduling adjacent or
       concurrent conferences for the SIGMAAs to encourage
       cross-over.
       Unlike the other institutions related to IBL teaching, the
       IBL SIGMAA is organized around a Charter document that lays
       out its operations, has open membership (though it requires
       one to be a paying member of the MAA), and makes decisions
       and elects officers with votes of the membership. I see
       this as a powerful way to give voice to anyone who wants to
       be part of the IBL community. This kind of democracy is
       certainly not guaranteed to lift up diverse perspectives,
       so I think that the executive board of the IBL SIGMAA has a
       responsibility to implement structures that help us realize
       this goal. I am working to make this happen, in part by
       expanding the executive board to include more diverse
       voices and more person-power to do this work; I worry about
       tokenism in this effort, and I am striving to make sure
       members have real power. We have also recently surveyed the
       IBL SIGMAA membership to understand the priorities they
       have for the organization in the short-term.
       at IBL events, and that space must be safe and supportive
       for them to share experiences and critiques that can lead
       to structural change in the community. In addition to
       diversifying the collection of voices in terms of race and
       identity, we need to make space for experiences like those
       of faculty at community colleges. I am helping to organize
       a panel for this summer’s mini-conference about diversity
       in IBL that I hope will make some of this space there. The
       IBL SIGMAA has also proposed a paper session at JMM 2018 to
       further these discussions. I worry that these efforts ask
       people who have felt marginalized to take a risk to educate
       more privileged people, which could become exploitative,
       but I hope they will be affirming.

   It is important to help my community evolve. This evolution
   will involve changing. It will also involve learning, because
   there is definitely expertise outside of the IBL community as
   it appears to me from the inside.

   (4) Building trust.
       one-time efforts. It will require focus and commitment
       spread over many years. I don’t think I can prescribe
       actions that will lead to trust because it must be
       negotiated jointly and responsively. However, I do think
       that one way to make this sustained effort is to ground it
       in shared values. Hence, I plan to organize discussions in
       which the IBL community articulates these values and
       recommits to them in an ongoing fashion.
       write and plan, I must listen. Not to respond but under the
       assumption that I have things to learn.

   I see injustice and inequity; returning to the words of Paulo
   Freire: “the educator has the duty of not being neutral” (We
   Make the Road by Walking).

   There are too many people who have helped me evolve my thinking
   about my responsibilities to thank them all individually, but
   recent conversations with Edray Goins, Sandra Laursen, Aditya
   Adiredja, and Dave Kung shine brightly in recent memory.
   This entry was posted in [27]inquiry, [28]racism, [29]sexism.
   Bookmark the [30]permalink.
   [31]← Hands Off My Confidence
   [32]Equity in Review: Reflections on Equity Research
   Perspectives at the 2017 RUME Conference →



