[232]Treatments


War Studies Suggest A Concussion Leaves The Brain Vulnerable To PTSD

War Studies Suggest A Concussion Leaves The Brain Vulnerable To PTSD

   [233]Listen · 6:36 6:36
   (BUTTON) Toggle more options


       (BUTTON) Embed <iframe src="https:/ <iframe
       width="100%" height="290" frameborder="0" scrolling="no"
       title="NPR embedded audio player">






    [239] javascript:void(0);

   September 26, 20164:39 AM ET
   Heard on [240]Morning Edition
   [241]Jon Hamilton 2010


   [242]Jon Hamilton
   [243]Enlarge this image


   Charles Mayer, 30, of San Diego survived an IED attack while
   serving in Iraq in 2010, but has suffered from complications
   including PTSD. Stuart Palley for NPR hide caption
   toggle caption
   Stuart Palley for NPR

   Charles Mayer, 30, of San Diego survived an IED attack while
   serving in Iraq in 2010, but has suffered from complications
   including PTSD.
   Stuart Palley for NPR

   There's growing evidence that a physical injury to the brain
   can make people susceptible to post-traumatic stress disorder.

   Studies of[244] troops who deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan
   have found that service members who have suffered a concussion
   or mild traumatic brain injury are far more likely to develop
   [245]PTSD, a condition that can cause flashbacks, nightmares
   and severe anxiety for years after a traumatic event.


   And research on both people and animals suggests the reason is
   that a brain injury can disrupt circuits that normally dampen
   the response to a frightening event. The result is like
   "driving a car and the brake's not fully functioning," says
   [246]Mingxiong Huang, a biomedical physicist at the University
   of California, San Diego.


   Scientists have suspected a link between traumatic brain injury
   (TBI) and PTSD for many years. But the evidence was murky until
   researchers began studying troops returning from Iraq and
   Afghanistan.

   What they found was a lot of service members like Charles
   Mayer, an Army sniper from San Diego who developed PTSD after
   finishing a deployment in Iraq.

   In 2010, Mayer was on patrol in an Army Humvee near Baghdad
   when a roadside bomb went off. "I was unconscious for several
   minutes," he says. So he found out what happened from the
   people who dragged him out.

   The blast fractured Mayer's spine. It also affected his memory
   and thinking. That became painfully clear when Mayer got out of
   the Army in 2012.
   [247]Enlarge this image


   Charles (right) gets tutoring from his brother David on the GRE
   test at their parents' home. The couch in the living room bears
   a blanket with images of the three Mayer brothers. Stuart
   Palley for NPR hide caption
   toggle caption
   Stuart Palley for NPR

   Charles (right) gets tutoring from his brother David on the GRE
   test at their parents' home. The couch in the living room bears
   a blanket with images of the three Mayer brothers.
   Stuart Palley for NPR

   "Two weeks later, I started school," he says. "And a simple
   math equation like 120 times 7, where I previously would do
   that in my head very easily, I all of a sudden couldn't do
   that."

   And Mayer had a bigger problem. His time in Iraq had left him
   with an uncontrollable fear of improvised explosive devices, or
   IEDs.

   "When I would walk down the street, I would walk away from
   trash piles because that's often how they would hide IEDs," he
   says. "I stayed away from large crowds."

   Mayer's fear was not only disturbing, it was disabling. "I
   would get severe panic attacks to the point where I would have
   to go to the hospital," he says. "I would feel like I'm
   actually having a heart attack."

   Eventually, Mayer went to a Veterans Affairs hospital for help.
   An exam confirmed that he had PTSD.

   The wars in Iraq and Afghanistan have produced thousands of
   Charles Mayers. First they got a concussion from a bomb blast.
   Then they got PTSD.

   "We had people who were looking very miserable when they came
   back," says [248]Dewleen Baker, a psychiatrist at UCSD and the
   VA San Diego Healthcare System.


   Baker kept asking herself: Was the PTSD just from the emotional
   trauma of combat? Or did a concussion alter the brain in a way
   that amplified fear and anxiety?

   "I could easily diagnose the PTSD," she says. "But I found it
   very, very difficult to tease apart the contribution of
   traumatic brain injury."
   [249]Enlarge this image


   Mayer in Iraq in 2010, where he served as a sniper and was
   injured in a roadside explosion. Courtesy of Charles Mayer hide
   caption
   toggle caption
   Courtesy of Charles Mayer

   Mayer in Iraq in 2010, where he served as a sniper and was
   injured in a roadside explosion.
   Courtesy of Charles Mayer

   So Baker and a team of researchers began studying more than
   1,600 Marine and Navy service members from Camp Pendleton, in
   San Diego County, Calif. The service members had been assessed
   before deploying to Iraq or Afghanistan, and then again three
   months after returning.

   "At one point we got this battalion that went to Helmand
   province in Afghanistan, and literally 50 percent of them were
   complaining of blast exposures and symptoms," Baker says. "I
   got concerned."

   Baker had reason to worry. The study found that troops who
   experienced a traumatic brain injury were twice as likely to
   develop post-traumatic stress disorder.

   But why? There was no easy way to answer that question in
   people. But several years ago some answers began to emerge from
   animal studies.

   In one experiment, a team of scientists at the University of
   California, Los Angeles compared healthy rats with rats that
   had experienced a traumatic brain injury. All of the rats
   received a type of behavioral conditioning known to induce
   fear.

   They found that fear response learned by the animals that had
   experienced a TBI was much greater than it normally would be,
   says [250]Michael Fanselow, a psychology professor at UCLA and
   an author of the [251]study.


   Next, the team looked at cells in the amygdala, a part of the
   brain that takes sensory information and decides whether to be
   afraid. They found changes that would amplify the animal's
   response to a frightening experience.

   "And we think that that's the way TBI has of increasing your
   susceptibility to post-traumatic stress," Fanselow says.

   If brain injuries really do change the brain's fear circuitry,
   there should be some way to detect that change in people, says
   Baker.

   So Baker teamed up with her colleague Mingxiong Huang, the
   biomedical physicist. Huang has been using a technology that
   measures electrical activity in the brain. It's called
   magnetoencephalography,or MEG.

   Huang and a team of researchers used MEG to scan the brains of
   84 people who had experienced a brain injury. Some of the
   participants were service members, some were civilians.

   Those scans found abnormal signals coming from the brains of
   people who'd had a concussion. And the location of those
   abnormal signals suggested that there was too much activity
   going on in the amygdala and not enough in an area that
   normally tempers emotional reactions.

   The result is a brain that is "like a car with no brake," Huang
   says.
   [252]Enlarge this image


   After leaving the Army and starting school, Charles discovered
   he could no longer do simple math equations in his head. Stuart
   Palley for NPR hide caption
   toggle caption
   Stuart Palley for NPR

   After leaving the Army and starting school, Charles discovered
   he could no longer do simple math equations in his head.
   Stuart Palley for NPR

   To learn more about the brain circuitry involved in both TBI
   and PTSD, Dewleen Baker is expanding her earlier study of
   Marines. She plans to scan the brains of about 200 combat
   veterans, including some with both TBI and PTSD.

   And Baker will have help from a researcher with a personal
   stake in the project: Charles Mayer, the former soldier whose
   college career was interrupted by PTSD.

   After getting treatment, Mayer was able to finish his
   undergraduate degree in December. Then Mayer, who is now 30,
   started looking for a job that would let him study the problems
   that had affected his own brain.

   "I looked up the psychiatrists that were doing research that I
   really cared about, and Dr. Baker was definitely up there," he
   says. And Baker hired him.

   Their research will focus on veterans. But the findings could
   also help identify civilians who've suffered a brain injury
   that could make them vulnerable to PTSD.


