‘Messy math’ from sardine studies could help fight flu outbreaks

   By [57]Patrick MonahanOct. 31, 2016 , 3:00 PM


   It’s about that time, in the Northern Hemisphere at least: flu
   season. Each winter in the temperate parts of the world, the
   influenza virus seemingly awakens from its slumber, leaving
   fevers, sniffles, and aches in its wake. Now, using
   mathematical techniques created for studying fluctuating fish
   populations, a team of researchers has shown that both
   temperature and humidity influence the timing of flu outbreaks
   all over the world—a finding that could lead to new ways to
   fight the virus.

   The relationship between climate and the flu looks simple in
   places like North America and Europe: Winter’s colder and drier
   weather means more outbreaks. But in the tropics, those cycles
   disappear, and things get decidedly harder to predict. Some
   researchers thought that meant climate just isn’t that
   important a factor in tropical flu outbreaks. But George
   Sugihara, a mathematical biologist at Scripps Institution of
   Oceanography in San Diego, California, suspected there might be
   a deeper rule connecting how the virus acts in the two regions.

   The problem, according to Sugihara, is that past studies
   examining flu prevalence have failed to look at it as a whole
   natural system, instead trying to analyze the impact of
   individual pieces like temperature and humidity. Sugihara is a
   pioneer of mathematical methods that throw out the equations
   and embrace the messiness of natural systems. His lab’s
   “empirical dynamic modeling” techniques use time-series data to
   look at the invisible ways these complicated systems are
   connected: like plucking one string out of a jumbled network
   and seeing which other strings echo back. In 2012, his group
   published a widely cited paper describing some of these
   techniques and their usefulness for studying sardine and
   anchovy populations. These methods have since been used for all
   sorts of different problems—from probing how greenhouse gases
   affect the climate to diagnosing early onset Alzheimer’s
   disease.

   A group of researchers led by Sugihara’s postdoctoral
   researcher Ethan Deyle now has applied their fishy methods to
   flu, looking at 18 years of data on worldwide influenza
   outbreaks. [58]They found that humidity is the strongest factor
   in driving influenza, but that temperature also plays a role,
   combining in a complex way that past studies were unable to
   pick up on. At temperatures up to about 24°C, drier climates
   encourage flu outbreaks, as seen in North America. Hotter than
   that, and the relationship flips: Suddenly, wetter environments
   are better for the flu, they write today in the Proceedings of
   the National Academy of Sciences.


   The way this relationship flips around 24°C also lines up with
   what researchers already know about the flu virus. It has a
   “viral envelope”—similar to a cell membrane—that has two
   distinct weaknesses: It can swell and burst if the climate is
   cold and humid, and it dries up when the environment is hot and
   dry. The authors say that these twin forces could explain why
   the relationship between temperature and humidity flips around
   24°C. If this idea turns out to have merit, then it might help
   fight winter flu outbreaks by, say, simply putting humidifiers
   in schools, homes for the elderly, and hospitals.

   The study also has an answer to why flu patterns are so
   different between tropical and temperate areas. The winter
   cycles of flu in temperate regions are due to the big,
   consistent changes in humidity and temperature. In the tropics,
   the same underlying rules link flu to the climate, but seasonal
   swings in temperature and humidity are so weak that a “flu
   season” doesn’t emerge from all of the noise.

   The work is “a great analysis,” says Jeffrey Shaman, an
   infectious disease climate scientist at Columbia University.
   But Shaman cautions that the team’s proposed mechanism is just
   one of a number of ways climate could act on the flu and needs
   to be tested further. He agrees that modifying indoor
   environments has untapped potential as a way of controlling
   disease transmission—but even if it’s possible to make the
   environment harder for a flu virus to spread, that could just
   create the ideal habitat for moisture-loving bacteria and
   molds. “There is no such thing as a free lunch,” he says.

   Others are less impressed with the analysis. Julian Tang, a
   clinical virologist at the United Kingdom’s University
   Hospitals of Leicester NHS Trust, notes that the humidity and
   temperature data used in the study come from outdoor weather
   monitoring stations, whereas it’s believed most flu
   transmission occurs indoors. “If you don’t use the right data,”
   Tang says, “whatever model you develop and apply, no matter how
   innovative, is likely to give you the wrong conclusions.”
   Posted in:



   DOI: 10.1126/science.aal0326
   [61][headshot_crop.JPG?itok=ONyL-YFO]



