Why do employers love mathematicians?

A degree in mathematics nurtures the skills you need for a variety of
satisfying and highly paid careers

   Advanced maths
   It all adds up: maths graduates often start jobs at the higher
   end of the salary scale Photo: Fotolia

   By Thea Jourdan

   6:23PM GMT 07 Mar 2014

   ^Check out [24]the Telegraph UK STEM Awards homepage


   If you know your cosines from your differentials, the future
   looks rosy.

   As a mathematician, you are in a strong position to get a great
   job, whether in the banking sector, teaching, computing or many
   other related sectors that require analytical and numerical
   skills.

   Kevin Goodman, group director of organisation and development
   at Babcock International Group, says: ''We value mathematics
   graduates because of their transferable skills: problem
   solving, logical thinking and the ability to understand
   technical information.”

   “A growing number of students are choosing maths for a good
   reason – they are in demand in the job market,” says Bruce
   Woodcock, careers adviser for science, technology and
   mathematics at the University of Kent, which has seen its
   intake of maths and actuarial science undergraduates rise
   fourfold, from around 50 per year in 2010 to nearly 210 per
   year today.

   Financially it makes sense, too. “If students are investing
   £9,000 per year in tuition fees, they need that investment to
   pay. We see many graduates starting jobs at the higher end of
   the salary scale,” adds Woodcock.

   The highest proportion of graduates from the University of Kent
   – 20 per cent – go into the finance sector, taking on roles in
   insurance, banking and risk management, but even more – 21pc –
   take a higher degree. “This can be an astute move, particularly
   if you want to go into statistics,” says Woodcock.

   By far the largest employer in this field is the Government
   Statistical Service (GSS), which employs 700 staff in more than
   30 departments, but there is also a need for statisticians in
   the pharmaceuticals industry, medical schools, hospitals and in
   agricultural institutes.

   The GSS has an exceptional number of posts for Statistician
   Fast Streamers in 2014, in London and across the UK. The Fast
   Stream provides training for graduates who have the potential
   to become senior leaders in the Civil Service.

   Teaching is also a popular choice for University of Kent
   graduates; incentivised by tax-free training bursaries, it
   attracts around 20pc. Another 10pc go into computing. “There’s
   a massive shortage of programmers and software engineers and
   salaries are very good. Computing is also an area that needs
   analytical skills, logic and numeracy,” says Woodcock.

   Many mathematicians are also recruited into the defence
   industry and other science and engineering companies.

   Paul Barton, 30, studied maths and computer science at the
   University of York before entering the graduate scheme at BAE
   Systems’ Electronic Systems business in Rochester, Kent, where
   he worked on an innovative helmet for pilots of the Eurofighter
   Typhoon combat aircraft. Now a senior engineer with the leading
   aerospace, defence and security company, he says maths gave him
   an excellent grounding.

   “It taught me how to tackle a range of issues in a logical way.
   Many of my peers at BAE Systems also have degrees in core STEM
   subjects, which form the basis of their professional skills.”

   Barton, who gained Chartered engineer status in 2011 after five
   years’ experience and is now based at BAE Systems’ Advanced
   Technology Centre in Chelmsford, Essex, believes maths also
   helped him gain managerial skills.

   “I now have five research engineers in my team developing
   technology to improve computer security and detect malware in
   systems.”

   Now, when he assesses candidates for year-long paid sandwich
   placements and summer placements at BAE Systems, he admits that
   he looks twice at maths students.

   Find out more at [25]The University of Kent's Mathematics
   Careers site and try out its [26]online aptitude tests


   Take a unique opportunity to kick-start your future career –
   enter [27]The Telegraph UK STEM Awards here



