   IFRAME: [1]//www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-56QKB5


   [ ] [DEL: :DEL] [DEL: :DEL] [DEL: :DEL]










   ____________________ (BUTTON)










   [20]News [21]Tech [22]Health [23]Planet Earth [24]Strange News
   [25]Animals [26]History [27]Culture [28]Space.com
   ____________________ (BUTTON)





     [30]Tech


              Book Excerpt: 'Are Numbers Real?' (US 2016)

   By Live Science Staff | December 2, 2016 12:35pm ET


   Book Excerpt: 'Are Numbers Real?' (US 2016)

   Have you ever wondered what humans did before numbers existed?
   How they organized their lives, traded goods, or kept track of
   their treasures? What would your life be like without them?
   Numbers began as simple representations of everyday things, but
   mathematics rapidly took on a life of its own, occupying a
   parallel virtual world. In "Are Numbers Real?," Brian Clegg
   explores the way that math has become more and more detached
   from reality, and yet despite this is driving the development
   of modern physics. Below is an excerpt from "Are Numbers Real?"
   (St. Martin's Press, 2016).

   Not entirely surprisingly, inﬁnity is a topic that never fails
   to stimulate the mind. Thoughts about the nature and existence
   of inﬁnity go back all the way to the Ancient Greeks. They were
   certainly aware that a sequence of numbers like the positive
   integers, the simple counting numbers would go on forever. If
   there were a biggest integer—call it max—then there surely
   could always be max + 1, max + 2, and so on. But the whole idea
   of inﬁnity made the Greeks uncomfortable. Their word for it,
   apeiron, suggested chaos and disorder.

   The Greek philosopher who took the deﬁnitive approach to
   inﬁnity for the period (a point of view that would remain
   dominant for centuries to come) was Aristotle, born in 384 BC
   in northern Greece. Aristotle argued that inﬁnity was both
   necessary and impossible. He used examples of aspects of the
   universe that he considered inﬁnite. The integers, as we have
   seen, or the span of time—which he argued had no end. And he
   believed that something could be divided up an inﬁnite set of
   times. But equally he came up with a range of often confusing
   arguments as to why inﬁnity could not exist in the real world.
   For example, he pointed out that a body is deﬁned by its
   boundaries. If a body were inﬁnite it would have no boundaries,
   hence it could not exist.

   After what was clearly a considerable mental struggle,
   Aristotle ﬁnally decided that inﬁnity was a potential, rather
   than a concept that was fulﬁlled in reality. This “potential
   inﬁnity” was something that could be aimed for, but could never
   practically be achieved. Inﬁnity existed, but could not be made
   real on demand. To illustrate the concept he used the neat
   example of the Olympic games. The games existed—there was no
   doubt of that. It wasn’t a ﬁctional concept. But generally
   speaking, if someone asked you to show him or her the Olympic
   games, you couldn’t. The games were a potential entity, rather
   than something you could point at and identify. Aristotle was
   careful to point out, though, that some potential entities were
   going to become actual at a point in space or time, yet this
   wasn’t the case with inﬁnity.

   This neutered concept of potential inﬁnity was exactly what
   Newton and Leibniz (see chapter 9) were dealing with when they
   devised calculus. The inﬁnity of calculus is something that we
   head toward—it is a limit that is never practically reached.
   And the target is exactly what the familiar symbol for inﬁnity,
   the lemniscate (∞) represents. It is the symbol for Aristotle’s
   potential inﬁnity. The lemniscate was introduced by Newton’s
   contemporary, John Wallis, who had written a rather dull
   treatise on the three-dimensional shapes known as conic
   sections, which are the result of cutting a pair of cones
   positioned point to point along various planes. (No one can
   accuse mathematicians of not knowing how to have fun.) Wallis
   just throws in a line that says “let ∞ represent inﬁnity”
   without ever explaining where this symbol comes from.

   For the vast majority of mathematicians, with one notable
   exception, this was sufficient to carry all the way through to
   the nineteenth century. In fact, potential inﬁnity was
   generally considered to be the only respectable way to think
   about the inﬁnite. For example, Carl Friedrich Gauss, the
   eminent nineteenth- century German mathematician deﬁnitively
   remarked:

   I protest against the use of an inﬁnite quantity as an actual
   entity; this is never allowed in mathematics. The inﬁnite is
   only a manner of speaking, in which one properly speaks of
   limits to which certain ratios can come as near as desired,
   while others are permitted to increase without bound.

   The exception to this blinkered thinking was the remarkable
   Galileo Galilei. The ﬁrst thing that springs to mind when
   Galileo is mentioned was his championing  of  the  Copernican
   theory that put the Sun rather than the Earth  at  the  center
   of  the  universe, leading to his trial by the Inquisition and
   permanent house arrest. However, in scientiﬁc terms his most
   signiﬁcant work was the book he published in 1638 called
   Discorsi e Dimostrazioni Matematiche Intorno a Due Nuove
   Scienze (Discourses and Mathematical Demonstrations Concerning
   Two New Sciences).  This was his masterpiece of physics, laying
   the ground for Newton’s triumphant completion of this work on
   mechanics, forces, and movement.

   Like his book on Copernican theory that got him into so much
   trouble, this new work was structured as a conversation between
   three characters, a format that was very popular at the time.
   Written in conversational Italian rather than stuffy Latin, it
   remains far more readable today than the formal and often
   near-impenetrable work of Newton. Given his position, serving a
   life sentence for the publication, it was remarkable that
   Galileo got the book published at all. He attempted to do so
   originally in Venice, then proud of its independence from Rome,
   but there was still a requirement to get the go-ahead from the
   Inquisition, which had issued a blanket prohibition on printing
   anything that Galileo wrote.

   If there was one thing that Galileo excelled in, it was
   stubbornness. Despite the prohibition, despite the risks of
   even indirectly evading it, when the Dutch publisher Lodewijk
   Elzevir visited Italy in 1636, Galileo managed to get a copy of
   his new manuscript to him. One fascinating aspect of the book
   as it ﬁnally came to print is the dedication. In earlier years,
   Galileo had always attempted to dedicate his writing to a power
   ﬁgure, who might as a result give him patronage. This book he
   dedicated to a former pupil who was now the French ambassador
   to Rome, Count François de Noailles. However, where previously
   Galileo could simply lavish as much praise as was possible (and
   plenty was possible in the sycophantic style of the time), here
   he had to be more careful, as the last thing he wanted to do
   was get Noailles into trouble with the Inquisition.

   In the wording, Galileo combined deviousness with an apparent
   naïveté. It is highly unlikely that the Inquisition fell for
   his attempt at deception— though, in practice, they seemed to
   have turned a blind eye. According to Galileo:

   I had decided not to publish any more of my work. And yet in
   order to save it from complete oblivion, it seemed wise to
   leave a manuscript copy in some place where it would be
   available at least to those who follow intelligently the
   subjects which I havetreated. Accordingly I chose ﬁrst to place
   my work in your Lord- ship’s hands ...

   So, on the one hand Galileo was thanking Noailles for his help.
   But at the same time he didn’t want to make it sound as if
   Noailles had been directly responsible for the publication, so
   he threw in some mysterious intermediaries:

   I was notiﬁed by the Elzevirs that they had these works of mine
   in press and that I ought to decide upon a dedication and send
   them a reply at once. This sudden unexpected news led me to
   think that the eagerness of your Lordship to revive and spread
   my name by passing these works on to various friends was the
   real cause of their falling into the hands of printers who,
   because they had already published other works of mine, now
   wished to honor me with a beautiful and ornate edition of this
   work.

   He could thank Noailles, but also managed to blame un- named
   friends of the ambassador for passing the manuscript to the
   printer. It’s clear that the idea that all this had happened
   without Galileo’s knowledge until the book was almost ready to
   print was a ﬁction. Not only did he ensure that Elzevir
   received a copy of the manuscript on his Italian visit, there
   was a considerable correspondence between Galileo and Elzevir
   over the content of the book. Galileo was the kind of author
   that cause publishers to tear their hair out, wanting to tweak
   his output to the last possible moment before going to print.
   This is bad enough with today’s electronic printing, but was a
   nightmare when each page had to be carefully set up in movable
   type and made into a physical printing plate. But whether the
   Inquisition was fooled or simply looked the other way, it did
   not intervene and the book was published, if unavailable for
   sale in Galileo’s native Italy.

   The “two new sciences” in the book’s title were those of the
   nature of solid matter and an analysis of motion, and it was in
   the ﬁrst section that the topic of inﬁnity came up. In trying
   to understand why solid matter sticks together so
   effectively—why, for instance, a piece of metal is so hard to
   break up—one of Galileo’s protagonists suggested that it is the
   vacuum between the tiny particles of matter that held them
   together. (He was wrong, it is electromagnetism, but it wasn’t
   a bad idea.) This theory was queried by Simplicio, whose role
   in the book was to challenge new thinking, mostly sticking to
   Ancient Greek ideas. Simplicio argued that there could only be
   a tiny bit of vacuum in so small a space, which could only
   apply a tiny force—far smaller than the powerful force that
   holds a piece of metal together.
   [31]Buy Are Numbers Real? on Amazon.com >>>


   Excerpted from "Are Numbers Real?: The Uncanny Relationship of
   Mathematics and the Physical World" by Brian Clegg. Copyright ©
   2016 by the author and reprinted with permission of St.
   Martin's Press, LLC.


