[70]Yes, You’re Irrational, and Yes, That’s OK


   By David Berreby

   Imagine that (for some reason involving cultural tradition,
   family pressure, or a shotgun) you suddenly have to get
   married. Fortunately, there are two candidates. One is charming
   and a lion in bed but an idiot about money. The other
   has...[71]READ MORE


   He was one of the first people born when he was, and situated
   where he was in an affluent high school in Seattle, to be able
   to get instant feedback. He spent endless hours doing that and
   without that experience, he’s quick to acknowledge that he
   never would have been able to do the things he did.

   There were many, many other episodes in his career, not least
   among them some careless negotiation by IBM that resulted in
   him getting the rights to sell copies of DOS on every computer
   that IBM sold. So there are many, many examples that he quickly
   acknowledges except for any of which we would never have heard
   of him today.

   Why do we downplay the role of luck?

   I think you could be cynical in trying to answer that question.
   It could be that people feel like if they acknowledge that they
   were lucky that the government will try to take more of their
   money and they can defend their position more successfully if
   they deny that luck had any influence on their success.

   I don’t think it’s necessary to go there. I prefer just to look
   at how people naturally construct their life histories. We
   assemble narratives about ourselves routinely and the elements
   that go into those are the things that we can retrieve most
   comfortably from memory. If you take, as a given, that the
   people who succeed on any grand scale are almost all of them
   hardworking, talented, that means that when they look back on a
   successful career 30 years in, they’ll remember all those times
   they got up early and worked late. They’ll remember all those
   difficult problems that they had to solve. They’ll remember all
   those very formidable opponents that they had to vanquish along
   the way.

   Those are totally accurate memories and they’ll recruit those.
   Those fit the narrative, the classical narrative of why people
   succeed, and so there’s nothing misleading about building your
   narrative out of elements like that. But what they’re much less
   likely to remember is that there was a teacher in the 10th
   grade that steered them out of trouble or maybe they got a
   promotion early on because a colleague who was just slightly
   more qualified couldn’t accept it because he had to care for an
   ailing parent. Those kinds of things don’t stand out nearly as
   vividly in memory so they don’t play as big a role in life
   histories that we construct.

   The other fundamental reason is that there’s a huge asymmetry
   between how people think about headwinds and tailwinds, and
   here I’ll mention the work of my friend and colleague Tom
   Gilovich, the psychologist at Cornell. When you’re riding a
   bike into a headwind you’re keenly aware of that. Every 100
   yards you travel, you wish that wind would go away. You’re
   battling against it, it’s at the front of your mind. Then the
   course changes direction; you’ve got the wind at your back.
   What a great feeling that is for about 20 seconds, and then
   it’s completely out of your mind. You’re not even aware that
   the wind is at your back. You’re not having to battle any
   enemies in that sense and so it’s out of your mind.

   So when you think back to your career what do you remember? You
   remember the headwinds you faced. You don’t remember all the
   tailwinds that were pushing you along. So there’s just these
   natural asymmetries that lead people to either ignore the role
   of luck entirely or overstate it to a considerable degree.

   Individualism is rooted in America. Is that why we take issue
   with luck?

   I think that’s part of it. Surely, it may also be, in a
   perverse way, adaptive to downplay the role of luck. If you
   think of yourself as the captain of your own fate, you’re
   probably going to be more effective at dealing with challenges
   that you confront in life. If you dwell a great deal on the
   fact that chance plays a big role, you may be more tempted to
   sit back and hope for a break instead of working hard and
   becoming an expert at something, which is the step you need to
   take if you want to have a real chance at succeeding.

   So, yeah, I think there are reasons, maybe not to dwell too
   much—especially when you’re starting out in life—on the fact
   that chance events are important. But at the same time, once
   you’ve succeeded it’s really very much in your interest to
   acknowledge that you succeeded, not just by dint of your own
   efforts, but also because you had some support and lucky breaks
   along the way.

     The fact that you exist at all is an extraordinary stroke of
     luck.

   We now know that if you accept that realization about your
   position, you’re happier, other people like you better, which
   may make it even more likely to succeed in the future. Your
   health is better and, most important, you’re more generous
   toward other people, you’re more willing to pay forward for the
   common good. You succeeded because others invested in creating
   opportunities for you. Who’s going to invest for the next group
   that comes along?

   If you think you did it all on your own, you develop a sense of
   entitlement that makes you determined to hang on to every
   nickel, and I think the stingy way we’ve been funding the
   public infrastructure in the last decades is really destined to
   make it harder for people to succeed in the next round.

   Why does acknowledging luck benefit us?

   The human psychology is stranger than most economists credit.
   We like to think in terms of scarcity. If you get more of one
   thing, you have to give up other things in other domains. But
   in human psychology, it doesn’t always seem to work that way.
   If you experience gratitude—and that’s an emotion that is
   kindled by recognizing that you’ve been lucky to be in the
   situation that you’re in—that reliably evokes positive feelings
   in you and creates this whole cascade of good outcomes in your
   sphere.

   Why that’s so I think is interesting. We could speculate about
   that, but the evidence is just very clear about it. The
   Buddhists have ways of thinking about this. If you want to get
   from A to B, maybe the best way to do that is not to set your
   sights directly on B but to develop some intermediate goal. You
   want to be a good person and maybe you’ll get to B more
   reliably if you try to be a good person than if you tried
   directly to get to B by any means possible.

   Do people in poverty or poor living conditions have bad luck?

   If you’re born on the South Side of Chicago, you can succeed.
   We have vivid examples of people who have succeeded. Deval
   Patrick, the former governor of Massachusetts, went to Harvard,
   became a successful business person, became the governor of
   Massachusetts. He’s a wonderfully successful human being, but
   if you’re born, like he was, on the South Side of Chicago, it’s
   much less likely that you’ll be able to succeed on that scale,
   as he is very quick to acknowledge.

   He worked hard, he was talented, but he got some very big
   breaks along the way that enabled him to succeed. So sure, I
   think most executives who are successful tend to think they
   made it on their own, but if you’ll ask them, “How do you think
   things would have played out for you if you’d been born in
   Somalia?” They’ll think about it for an instant and say, “Yeah,
   it wouldn’t have played out nearly as well.” Most of them will
   acknowledge that without hesitation.

   A few will say I would have prevailed anyway. We can be
   skeptical of that point of view. But most people are not blind
   to the fact that their circumstances mattered a great deal to
   them, if you can get them only to reflect for a moment on that.

   What’s the luckiest thing that could happen to you?

   The luckiest thing that could ever happen to you is to be born
   of the right parents at the right time in the right place. If
   you’re in a developed country that has good institutions, such
   that if you’re talented and hardworking, you have a chance to
   make something of yourself, that’s a huge lucky start for you
   in life.

   But having talent and the inclination to work hard, where do
   those come from? We don’t know exactly, except to say that
   they’re some mysterious combination of your genes and your
   upbringing, and those come almost exclusively from your
   parents. So having the right parents is really a huge part of
   that picture.

   You’re just lucky if you’ve got a temperament that urges you to
   get up in the morning and hit the ground running. Not everyone
   has that temperament. It’s probably useful for you to think
   that it’s up to you whether you work hard, and it is up to
   you—you have to summon the will to do it—but some people summon
   the will, others don’t. And ultimately there’s a lot to the
   temperaments that we inherit that explains who does and who
   doesn’t.

   Is genetics luck?

   Oh, the genes that you inherit are a huge element of your luck.
   The fact that you exist at all is an extraordinary stroke of
   luck. The odds are really sharply against any one individual
   even existing.

   But that’s not interesting. I think it is useful for people who
   have succeeded if they’re smart, if they had good
   upbringing—those are good things. You should feel good about
   them, but you should be hesitant to claim too much moral credit
   for them. You didn’t choose your parents, you didn’t choose how
   you were brought up. That was a lot of things external to you.

   Why don’t economists acknowledge the influence of our
   surroundings?

   You know, that’s been something that I’ve tried to puzzle
   through for many decades. I think most people, if you ask them
   in the context of specific examples, “Do your surroundings
   affect your evaluations of things?” They would agree without
   hesitation that, yes, they do.

   If you were a driver in the 1920s, if your car got to 60 miles
   an hour eventually, it would have been considered
   breathtakingly fast. Now to get to 60 miles an hour in less
   than 5 seconds, people wonder what’s the matter that they
   didn’t put a little bit more oomph under the hood in this car.
   Everything is contextual.

   The people getting married today spend $31,000 on average on
   their wedding receptions. Inflation-adjusted terms in 1980,
   they spent $10,000. Nobody is arguing, to my knowledge, that
   the couples getting married today are happier because they’re
   spending more than three times as much. In fact, there’s
   evidence that people who spend more actually are more likely to
   divorce than people who spend less.

   But still, it’s quite reasonable that people want the guests to
   remember their daughter’s wedding as a special occasion, but
   special is a purely relative concept. If other people are
   spending more and we spend a pittance, then we’re thought to
   have failed to recognize what a special day it was.

   So those types of judgments, I think, are so commonplace that
   everybody acknowledges them when they think about them, but
   still economic models assume that context has no effect
   whatsoever on evaluations like that. Why is that? Great
   question. I’ve got some thoughts about it, but it would take a
   long time to unpack that. I’m going to keep thinking and
   writing about it. Maybe I’ll write a book about that someday.

   Why do you say chance events have grown more important
   recently?

   That’s really connected with the change in market structure
   that we’ve seen in recent decades. Technology lets the people
   who are good at what they do extend their reach much more
   broadly than before. If you’re the best author of tax software,
   now you can do the taxes for tens of millions of people
   everywhere. Used to be that people would go to local
   accountants for advice about that.

   So what those kinds of markets do, is they set up huge
   tournaments. Thousands, tens of thousands of people try to
   become anointed as the best at what they do and so the prize,
   if you win, is much, much bigger than before even if the person
   who wins is only one-tenth of 1 percent better, or just a
   little luckier, than the next best contestant who didn’t win.
   So luck matters more in the sense that the difference between
   what you get if you win and what you get if you don’t win is
   much bigger.

   The fact that there’s so many contestants means that there’s
   crowding at the top, so that the very best contestant is much
   less likely to win than before because there will be others who
   are almost as good, many of whom will be much luckier than he
   was. So even if luck doesn’t count for very much, that little
   extra push from luck will be enough to overcome the slight
   disadvantage a candidate might have on the talent and effort
   scales.

   What role does luck play in science?

   A discovery is more likely to have impact if it occurs in a
   context in which people are receptive to it. It’s been said …
   Max Plank once remarked that science makes progress one funeral
   at a time. People don’t change their minds, people die, and
   other people who are more receptive to ideas take their place.

   So if your idea comes out in a context in which people are
   inclined to focus on it and think about it, it’s much more
   likely to have impact than if it comes out at a time when
   people are focused on other things. So, yes, luck matters quite
   a bit.

   What would you be if you weren’t an economist?

   I became an economist purely by chance. I don’t think it was
   ever something that I carefully planned. If my career began
   today the way it had begun back when it did begin, I would have
   been out of the profession in short order. I was lucky to get
   the job I got and luckier still to remain in it.

   So, if I hadn’t become an economist, I don’t know what I would
   have done. Probably not anything that worked out as well for me
   as what I have done. But if I could have dialed in any option I
   wanted, I think I would have become a cartoonist.

   I so admire the economy of expression that’s available to the
   cartoonist. To capture so much in just a few ink strokes and to
   convey so much about the human condition so economically.
   That’s what I would choose to do.


