The Mathematics of Coffee Extraction: Searching for the Ideal Brew

   By [46]Lina Sorg


   A lot of math goes into the coffee extraction process. Public
   domain photo.
   Composed of over 1,800 chemical components, coffee is one of
   the most widely-consumed drinks in the world. The seeds (coffee
   beans) from the plant of the same name are roasted and ground,
   allowing a flow of hot water to extract their soluble content.
   Undissolved solids are filtered from the dissolved particles,
   and the resulting liquid becomes the concoction that much of
   the population drinks every day.

   Brewers have developed numerous techniques to prepare the
   popular beverage. All techniques are based on leaching via a
   solid-liquid extraction, and each method aims to produce the
   best quality coffee possible – a subjective feat that, despite
   evaluations from professional coffee tasters, is often a matter
   of personal preference. Because so many chemical compounds
   comprise a single batch of coffee, determining precise
   correlations between the solubles’ physical parameters and the
   beverage’s quality is difficult. However, understanding the
   mathematics of extraction can help identify the influence of
   various parameters on the final product. In a paper publishing
   next week in the SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics, Kevin M.
   Moroney, William T. Lee, Stephen B.G. O’Brien, Freek Suijver,
   and Johan Marra present and analyze a new multiscale model of
   coffee extraction from a coffee bed.

   While past studies have investigated the mathematics of coffee
   extraction, researchers have previously paid little attention
   to the drip filter brewing system. Drip filter machines make up
   about 10 million of the 18+ million coffee machines sold yearly
   in Europe, and involve pouring hot water over a bed of coffee
   grounds housed in a filter. Gravity pulls the water through the
   filter, extracting coffee solubles from the grains during the
   flow.

   (a) Espresso coffee is made by forcing hot water under high
   pressure through a compacted bed of finely ground coffee. (b)
   Drip filter brewing involves pouring hot water over a loose bed
   of coarser coffee in a filter. In either method water flows
   through the bed, leaching soluble coffee components from the
   grains. Any undissolved solids in the fluid are filtered from
   the extract as the liquid leaves the filter. Image credit:
   Kevin M. Moroney
   Moroney et al.’s current paper focuses on drip filter machines
   and expands upon the authors’ previous work, which was
   published in Chemical Engineering Science in 2015. “Most of the
   models of coffee extraction we found in the literature either
   focused on batch extraction in a well-mixed system, or derived
   general transport equations without proposing specific
   extraction mechanisms or validating with experiments,” Moroney
   said. “In comparison, our model describes flow and extraction
   in a coffee bed, specifies extraction mechanisms in terms of
   the coffee grain properties, and compares the model’s
   performance with experiment. Our initial focus on the
   flow-through cylindrical brewing chamber allowed us to consider
   the model in one spatial coordinate and ensure that the model
   assumption of a static bed was valid.”

   The authors’ earlier paper presents the derivation of this
   general model, which considers bed dimensions, flow rates,
   grind size distribution, and pressure drop. They assume
   isothermal conditions (constant temperature), because optimal
   brewing circumstances require a narrow temperature range of
   91-94 degrees Celsius. They also assume that coffee bed
   properties remain homogeneous in any cross section and that
   water saturates all pores in the coffee bed, eliminating the
   need to model unsaturated flow. A set of conservation equations
   on the bed scale monitor the transport of coffee and liquid
   throughout the coffee bed.

   Now the authors take that model one step further. “The model of
   coffee brewing published in Chemical Engineering Science was
   mathematically complete, but I would describe it as a model
   only a computer could love: a complicated system of coupled
   partial differential equations that can only be solved
   numerically,” Lee said. “This new paper analyses that model to
   produce a reduced system of equations for which approximate
   analytic solutions can be found.”

   Transfers included in the coffee extraction model (reproduced
   from K. M. Moroney et al, 2015): The diagram shows the
   transfers of water and coffee which are described by the coffee
   extraction model presented in the above reference. Image
   credit: Kevin M. Moroney
   Because coffee brewing involves so many components, simplifying
   the model becomes necessary. “In modelling a complicated
   physical process such as coffee brewing, one attempts to write
   down a system of equations which captures the essence of the
   process,” O’Brien said. “In doing so, we initially make some
   simplifications, which neglect some aspects of the real
   problem. For example, real coffee contains a large number of
   dissolved substances; we simplify our model by considering the
   case of a single such substance. The mathematical model then
   comprises conservation laws (mass momentum), which in their
   complete form cannot be solved exactly.”

   The authors then utilize non-dimensionalism, which measures
   variables with respect to fundamental constants intrinsic to
   the problem, to further simplify the extraction model. This
   technique reduces the number of parameters—which include brew
   ratio, brewing time, water quality and temperature, grind size
   and distribution, and extraction uniformity—therefore letting
   the authors recognize the equations’ dominant terms before they
   begin actively seeking solutions. “Neglecting smaller terms
   thus allows us to find approximate solutions,” O’Brien said.

   Recognizing these approximate solutions helps the authors
   easily identify typical trends. “Approximate solutions are
   formed based on the dominant processes in the coffee bed during
   different stages of the extraction process,” Moroney said.
   “Initially, the concentration of coffee in the bed is
   determined by the balance between a rapid extraction from the
   surfaces of coffee grains and the rate at which coffee is
   removed from the coffee bed by the extracting water. Later in
   the process, the extraction is dominated by slow diffusion of
   coffee from the kernels of larger grains, which was initially
   negligible.” Although the timescales of the aforementioned
   extraction methods are much shorter in fine coffee grinds
   rather than coarse grinds, the authors can still construct
   approximate solutions because of the timescale ratios’ small
   size. “The value of the solutions lies in the ability to
   explicitly relate the performance of a brewing system with the
   properties of the coffee, water and equipment used,” Moroney
   said. These solutions help predict the coffee quality for
   specific brewing configurations.

   Location of coffee in the bed: The coffee bed consists of
   (intergranular) pores and grains. The grains consist of
   (intragranular) pores and solids. The schematic shows the
   breakdown of this coffee in the grains (intragranular pores are
   not represented for clarity). Image credit: Kevin M. Moroney

   In the end, the authors intend for their model analysis to
   expose the mathematics involved in coffee brewing. “The
   research work is ultimately aimed at improving our
   understanding of the brewing process and understanding the
   relation between brewing process parameters and perceived
   coffee taste,” Marra said.

   A possible next step involves incorporating the changing coffee
   bed shape that occurs while water flows through the conical
   filter holder of a drip filter machine. “This causes both the
   extraction and the flow rate through the coffee bed to become a
   function of position,” Marra said. The authors’ research also
   has the potential to inspire further models on different
   extraction processes, including unsaturated flow and the
   trapping of air pockets in a coffee bed, in the never-ending
   quest for a perfect cup of coffee.

   Source article: Asymptotic Analysis of the Dominant Mechanisms
   in the Coffee Extraction Process. SIAM Journal on Applied
   Mathematics, 76(6), 2196-2217.

   About the authors: Kevin M. Moroney is a Ph.D. researcher with
   the Mathematics Applications Consortium for Science and
   Industry (MACSI) in the Department of Mathematics and
   Statistics at the University of Limerick. William T. Lee is a
   lecturer in the Department of Mathematics and Statistics at the
   University of Limerick, and is a part of MACSI. Stephen B.G.
   O’Brien is director of MACSI and a professor of applied
   mathematics at the University of Limerick. Freek Suijver is a
   program manager and senior director of the Program Management
   Team at Philips Research Laboratories. Johan Marra is a
   principal scientist and chemical engineer at Philips Research
   Laboratories.
   Lina Sorg is the associate editor of SIAM News.
   Please enable JavaScript to view the [47]comments powered by
   Disqus.[48]blog comments powered by Disqus
   About SIAM News Blogs


   The SIAM News Blog brings together updates on cutting edge
   research, events and happenings, as well as insights on broader
   issues of interest to the applied math and computational
   science community. Learn more or submit an article or idea.

   [49]Learn more
   Most Recent
   [50][Awards.png]
   [51]Happening Now
   [52]Red Sock Award Acknowledges Standout Posters at DS17
   [53][Awards.png]
   [54]Get Involved
   [55]James H. Wilkinson Prize
   [56][Research.png]
   [57]Research
   [58]Deep Learning Models in Finance
   [59][Research.png]
   [60]Careers
   [61]Beyond UQ: Dealing with Deep Uncertainty
   [62][Announcements.png]
   [63]Announcements
   [64]Illinois Students Named Champions in National M3 Challenge
   [65][CurrentIssue.png]
   [66]Current Issue
   [67]Electricity Demand Response and Optimal Contract Theory
   [68][ResearchNuggets.png]
   [69]Research Nuggets
   [70]Modeling Invasive Activity: Zebra Mussels’ Infiltration of
   North American Rivers
   [71]See More News
   Article Tags


   SIAM News







   3600 Market Street, 6th Floor, Philadelphia, PA 19104
   [78]webmaster@siam.org Copyright 2016 Society for Industrial
   and Applied Mathematics

     [78] email:webmaster@siam.org


