Using maths to outsmart mosquitoes

   By Ken Macdonald BBC Scotland Science Correspondent


   These are external links and will open in a new window





       Share this with
       These are external links and will open in a new window
            Share this with Email

            Share this with Facebook

            Share this with Messenger

            Share this with Messenger

            Share this with Twitter

            Share this with Pinterest

            Share this with WhatsApp

            Share this with LinkedIn
       Copy this link
       [83]Read more about sharing.
       These are external links and will open in a new window
       (BUTTON) Close share panel


   Aedes aegyptii Image copyright SPL

   Researchers at Strathclyde university are working to combat a
   deadly tropical disease - using mathematics.

   Dengue fever is caused by a virus carried by Aedes mosquitoes.

   The number of cases has grown dramatically in recent years with
   close to 60 million people catching it every year.

   Although it is fatal in only a small proportion of cases, it
   means deaths are still in the tens of thousands.
   Image caption Millions of people catch dengue fever every year

   The World Health Organisation says 500,000 people a year need
   hospital treatment for dengue in Africa, the Americas, the
   eastern Mediterranean, southeast Asia and the western Pacific.

   The currently favoured approach is to search and destroy the
   mosquitoes using methods such as spraying fogs of insecticides.

   But the authorities in Malaysia wanted something more
   environmentally friendly which did not increase the mosquitoes'
   resistance and kill their predators.

   Which is why the Strathclyde University team, led by
   mathematician Dr David Greenhalgh, has been working with its
   Malaysian partners to assess the effectiveness of a new type of
   mosquito trap.

   The exact design is still under wraps but I can reveal that it
   looks a bit like a yogurt pot.

   That belies its huge potential in a new approach to fighting
   tropical diseases: don't use search and destroy - outsmart the
   insects.

   "The trap contains a chemical solution that attracts female
   mosquitoes into it," Dr Greenhalgh says.

   "There's a piece of paper leading into the chemical solution.

   "The female mosquitoes that are attracted to the trap lay their
   eggs on the piece of paper and the chemical stops the eggs
   developing."
   Image copyright AFP Image caption Dengue fever is spread by the
   Aedes aegypti mosquito

   Mathematics comes into the process because Dr Greenhalgh and
   colleagues have built a computer model of how the disease
   spreads.

   From that they can simulate how the trap affects the spread of
   the virus among people and mosquitoes.

   He says people go through different stages of the disease.

   "There are four different types of dengue, four different
   serotypes," he says.

   "Usually the infection with the first serotype is quite mild.

   "But if you get a second infection with a different strain it
   can have very serious effects."

   Dr Greenhalgh adds: "As well as modelling how the people go
   through those different stages, the mosquitoes also go through
   different stages.

   "So you're trying to model how these populations interact, with
   mosquitoes biting people, with the disease spreading from
   people to mosquitoes and vice versa."

   The variables in the mathematical model include the number of
   traps, the area's history of dengue infections, plus the
   numbers of mosquitoes and breeding sites.


