Why you should care

   Because you’re going to have to relearn the list of planets in
   our solar system … again.

   By [58]James Watkins


   The Daily DoseDEC 06 2016

   Konstantin Batygin made the decision of which college to attend
   with the intention of keeping his band together. (When a guy at
   Costco recognized him from a rock show, he thought, “With this
   kind of momentum, we can’t quit!”) Day one at UC Santa Cruz, an
   unknown “drifter” told him, “You should do astrophysics — that
   shit is dope.” He did so. Today, his office has thug-life
   posters on the door and big-kid toy planes on the shelves. He
   wears a shark-tooth necklace, and he uses the word hashtag out
   loud. Oh, and this millennial just turned the astrophysics
   universe upside-down when he predicted the existence of a new
   planet in our solar system.

   After researching the movements of distant objects in the band
   of space trash just outside Neptune called the Kuiper belt
   (where former planet Pluto is among the largest of the lumps of
   rock and ice), Caltech astronomer Mike Brown noticed that their
   lopsided orbits curiously all point in the same direction. He
   immediately took the puzzle four doors down the hallway, to his
   former student turned colleague, the then-28-year-old Batygin.
   With Brown’s expertise analyzing astronomical data, Batygin’s
   creativity with astrophysical theory and the help of Caltech’s
   $2-million [59]supercomputer, the pair took two years to settle
   the issue. They published their findings this year, with as
   close as you can get to proof of a never-before-seen planet.
   Cons




   The brains behind the supercomputer.

   Source [60]Sean Culligan/OZY


   No one’s spotted the planet yet, but Batygin and Brown’s
   findings have set about eight other teams around the world
   scouring [61]the night sky, racing to confirm the existence of
   the glamorously named Planet Nine. They know that it’s
   somewhere in a section of the Orion constellation, but because
   it is so far out (at its furthest, 40 times further out than
   Neptune), it is very, very faint.


   Nobody has discovered a planet in our solar system for 170
   years. When Neptune was discovered in 1846, verifying the
   predictions of Frenchman Urbain Le Verrier, it was “one of the
   most glorious confirmations of theoretical work becoming
   reality” in scientific history, says Batygin. Now he is trying
   to do the very same thing. But don’t think he just jumped to
   conclusions to earn a place in the history books: “We
   purposefully did not touch the idea of a planet [at first]
   because the people that scream ‘Planet! Planet! Planet!’ are
   always wrong,” Batygin says. Indeed, they exhaustively ruled
   out every other realistic explanation for the wonky Kuiper belt
   orbits, from a stellar flyby to a sci-fi-sounding galactic
   tide, before settling on Planet Nine. You know a theory looks
   good when it explains and predicts phenomena that had seemed
   unrelated to the initial puzzle (just ask [62]Einstein). Sure
   enough, Batygin and Brown’s Planet Nine model predicted, with
   pinpoint accuracy, the locations of several other previously
   unidentified Kuiper belt objects, and it even explains the
   enduring astronomical mystery that the sun is tilted relative
   to the rest of the Solar System.
   Const 4




   The Russia-born, Japan-raised Californian in his office at
   Caltech.

   Source [63]Sean Culligan/OZY


   The drama of it “hasn’t really sunk in yet,” Batygin says. He
   gets too caught up in the mathematical minutiae of his day job
   — along with his side passion for rock ’n’ roll — to digest the
   enormity of it all. (He is vocalist and lead singer for his own
   band, [64]The Seventh Season, composed entirely of Caltech
   scientists; they’ve put out three albums.)


     One of the greatest things about rock ’n’ roll is it’s a way
     to not care about the rules. That’s important in science too
     — you have to not give a shit about what somebody said 50
     years ago.

     — Konstantin Batygin

   The Russia-born, Japan-raised Californian is upsetting
   astronomical apple carts even beyond his search for Planet
   Nine: UCLA astrophysicist Jean-Luc Margot calls him “a creative
   dynamist” who applies his intuitive understanding of the
   movement of objects in space to many different fields. “I don’t
   think there’s anybody like him who’s done so many innovative
   things in so many different ways at age 30,” says Brown. He has
   rewritten decades-old planet-formation textbooks after proving
   that Jupiter-size planets can form close to stars, and he’s
   shown that the solar system is inherently unstable, settling a
   problem stretching back to Newton. “I have to warn him now and
   then that doing so many things, some people are just gonna get
   irritated at your existence,” jokes Brown.
   Const dip



   Source [65]Sean Culligan/OZY


   For now, though, Planet Nine’s existence looks merely
   “promising,” Margot notes; it remains “hypothesis on the basis
   of indirect evidence.” If and when it is found, the new planet
   is unlikely to bear Batygin and Brown’s names for glorious
   posterity. “We would have to invent a new procedure” for such
   an exceptional event, says Piero Benvenuti, general secretary
   of the International Astronomical Union, which would have the
   final say. He suggests that public opinion could be considered,
   so we can all look forward to a planet named Harambe, or
   perhaps [66]Planet McPlanetface.


     Had a wonderful time at the show tonight! Thanks everyone
     for coming. Picture taken by [67]@Miquai
     [68]pic.twitter.com/Pm7vadyEZm
     — Konstantin Batygin (@kbatygin) [69]October 20, 2016


   In the meantime, “I love” the name Planet Nine, says Batygin,
   scribbling some math on his office chalkboard. “It’s
   descriptive!” At six-foot-three (he’s been this height since he
   was a kid — he was made to skip second grade because he was too
   tall), he writes his equations on the top half of the board,
   while the bottom is reserved for slightly misshapen drawings of
   flowers by his 4-year-old daughter. “You don’t want your kids
   growing up thinking you’re super lame, that you used to be cool
   and used to play in a band,” he says. It seems the music’s
   still more important to him than the fact he’s on the verge of
   the scientific discovery of the century.
       James Watkins on Twitter[73]Contact James Watkins

     [73] javascript:void(0)


