Use in the Classroom

   Cowley’s work can be used in Mathematics Education classes to
   discuss kinesthetic activities for teaching geometric concepts.
   It can also serve as motivation for lessons and projects in
   Geometry classes. Students can make models, for example, of the
   Platonic Solids, and discover Euler’s Formula (V - E + F = 2)
   while reviewing Vertices, Edges, and Faces.

   Students may also enjoy a proof of why there are only 5 regular
   (Platonic) solids. This proof reviews regular polygons and the
   fact that each angle in a regular polygon has (n - 2)180/n
   degrees when n is the number of sides; therefore each interior
   angle of an equilateral triangle is 60 degrees, each interior
   angle of a square is 90 degrees, each interior angle of a
   regular pentagon is 108 degrees, and each interior angle of a
   regular hexagon is 120 degrees. We first search for
   two-dimensional diagrams consisting only of equilateral
   triangles. A minimum of 3 such triangles converging at the same
   vertex are needed to fold up to a 3-dimensional shape. So, it
   would require either 3 equilateral triangles at a vertex
   (adding to 180 degrees) or 4 equilateral triangles at a vertex
   (adding to 240 degrees) or 5 equilateral triangles at a vertex
   (adding to 300 degrees). There could not be 6 equilateral
   triangles at a vertex because that adds to 360 degrees, and it
   would not be possible to fold up the diagram into a
   3-dimensional shape.

   Shapes for folding up regular solids.

   Those valid choices give us the patterns for the tetrahedron (3
   equilateral triangles at a vertex), octahedron (4 equilateral
   triangles at a vertex), and icosahedron (5 equilateral
   triangles at a vertex).

   Next, we investigate patterns with squares. A minimum of 3
   converging at the same vertex are needed to fold up to a
   3-dimensional shape. So, it would require either 3 squares at a
   vertex (adding to 270 degrees) or 4 squares at a vertex which
   adds to 360 degrees, in which case the folder would not be able
   to fold up the diagram into a 3-dimensional shape. So, the only
   pattern is that of a hexahedron, or cube, with 3 squares
   converging at the same vertex.

   Next, classes can investigate patterns with regular pentagons.
   A minimum of 3 converging at the same vertex are needed to fold
   up to a 3-dimensional shape. So, it would require either 3
   regular pentagons at a vertex (adding to 324 degrees) or 4
   regular pentagons at a vertex which adds to 432 degrees, in
   which case one could not fold up the diagram into a
   3-dimensional shape. So, the only pattern is that of a
   dodecahedron with 3 regular pentagons converging at the same
   vertex.

   Next, we investigate patterns with regular hexagons. A minimum
   of 3 converging at the same vertex are needed to fold up to a
   3-dimensional shape. So, it would require 3 at a vertex (adding
   to 360 degrees), but one would not be able to fold up the
   diagram into a 3-dimensional shape. Our search is done. There
   are only 5 regular polyhedra.

   In a History of Mathematics class, Cowley's book could motivate
   a discussion of Plato, his mathematical contributions (such as
   Socrates and the Slave Boy), and what he thought the Platonic
   Solids represented. One could also discuss Kepler and how he
   used the Platonic Solids to investigate the solar system.


