Print this article

   [10]mathematics[11]Q&A[12]superconductivity


   A few years back, a prospective doctoral student sought out
   [13]Sylvia Serfaty with some existential questions about the
   apparent uselessness of pure math. Serfaty, then newly
   decorated with the prestigious Henri Poincaré Prize, won him
   over simply by being honest and nice. “She was very warm and
   understanding and human,” said Thomas Leblé, now an instructor
   at the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences at New York
   University. “She made me feel that even if at times it might
   seem futile, at least it would be friendly. The intellectual
   and human adventure would be worth it.” For Serfaty,
   mathematics is about building scientific and human connections.
   But as Leblé recalled, Serfaty also emphasized that a
   mathematician has to find satisfaction in “weaving one’s own
   rug,” alluding to the patient, solitary work that comes first.


   Born and raised in Paris, Serfaty first became intrigued by
   mathematics in high school. Ultimately she gravitated toward
   physics problems, constructing mathematical tools to forecast
   what should happen in physical systems. For her doctoral
   research in the late-1990s, she focused on the Ginzburg-Landau
   equations, which describe superconductors and their vortices
   that turn like little whirlwinds. The problem she tackled was
   to determine when, where and how the vortices appear in the
   static (time-independent) ground state. She solved this problem
   with increasing detail over the course of more than a decade,
   together with Étienne Sandier of the University of Paris-East,
   with whom she co-authored the book Vortices in the Magnetic
   Ginzburg-Landau Model.

   In 1998, Serfaty discovered an irresistibly puzzling problem
   about how these vortices evolve in time. She decided that this
   was the problem she really wanted to solve. Thinking about it
   initially, she got stuck and abandoned it, but now and then she
   circled back. For years, with collaborators, she built tools
   that she hoped might eventually provide pathways to the desired
   destination. In 2015, after almost 18 years, she finally hit
   upon the right point of view and arrived at the solution.

   “First you start from a vision that something should be true,”
   Serfaty said. “I think we have software, so to speak, in our
   brain that allows us to judge that moral quality, that truthful
   quality to a statement.”

   And, she noted, “you cannot be cheated, you cannot be lied to.
   A thing is true or not true, and there is this notion of
   clarity on which you can base yourself.”

   In 2004, at age 28, she won the European Mathematical Society
   prize for her work analyzing the Ginzburg-Landau model; this
   was followed by the Poincaré Prize in 2012. Last September, the
   piano-playing, bicycle-riding mother of two returned as a
   fulltime faculty member to the Courant Institute, where she had
   held various positions since 2001. By her count, she is one of
   five women among about 60 full-time faculty members in the math
   department, a ratio she figures is unlikely to balance itself
   out anytime soon.

   [14]Quanta Magazine talked with Serfaty in January at the
   Courant Institute. An edited and condensed version of the
   conversation follows.



