  Total Photos vs. Time

   Let’s do this. I will make a plot of the total number of
   pictures on my computer as a function of year they were
   created. In Mac OS X Yosemite, I can create a smart folder in
   Finder that only shows jpeg images from the year 2002. I can
   also do a similar thing in the Photos app. These two methods
   can (and will) give slightly different numbers. The Photos app
   will probably just be pictures I took (or maybe from my wife).
   The Finder smart folder will give all jpeg images. These could
   be from any source. Some were created by me for my blog and
   others were created for other purposes.

   Here is the plot of the total number of pictures vs year
   created.

                       [42]Total Images Stored


   This graph shows that I seem to be taking more pictures each
   year. But graphs can do more than just look pretty. They can be
   useful too. Could I use this to estimate how many pictures I
   will have by next year? Of course I can. The first step is to
   fit some type of mathematical function to the data. If the data
   doesn’t look linear, how do you pick a function for the data?
   Well, you could just guess until you find something that looks
   nice. You could also fit a function based on your own ideas. I
   could say “hey, it looks like the number of images added
   increases each year – this could be an exponential function.”
   That would work too. Or perhaps the best source of a function
   is to make a different plot. If I use the same data but plot
   the vertical data with a log axis, you might be able to see if
   it’s an exponential. Like this:

                       [43]Total Images Saved


   An exponential function would look like a straight line on a
   log-plot. That looks fairly straight. So, that’s how I picked
   an exponential function. There is one problem. I have time
   values in years. If I use the year as the actual time, things
   might get crazy. I am going to change the time such that the
   year 2000 is t = 0. Here is the new plot with the fitting
   function.

                    [44]Total Images on Computer


   Let me write the function in a slightly different form (and
   with units). La te xi t 1 With this equation I can estimate the
   total number of pictures I will have in the future. Let’s pick
   the year 2020 (which would be t = 20 yrs). If I put that value
   in for the time, I get a value for N at 117 thousand (117,171
   actually). That’s a lot of pictures. I wonder what they will be
   pictures of? Maybe it will be pictures of me on my fusion
   powered jet-pack. How many pictures will I take each year? I
   can get an estimate for this by taking the derivative of the
   total number of pictures with respect to time. ([45]Here is a
   quick intro to derivatives.) La te xi t 1 If I put in 14.5
   years (my numbering scheme says that right now I am in the
   14.5^th year) into this expression, it says that I am currently
   taking 5,604 pictures per year. That might seem crazy, but yes,
   I take a lot of pictures. Let’s just convert that to images per
   day and I get 15.3 pic/day. Wow. I should slow down. Ok, one
   last question before I give homework. Suppose I take a picture
   every second of the day. What year will this happen according
   to my model? To start this problem, let me convert the picture
   rate of 1 per second into images per year. Oh, I am going to
   call the image rate N‘. La te xi t 1 Now I am going to take
   that same N‘ equation above and solve for t. La te xi t 1 There
   are two important things to point out. First, the units work. I
   have one over years to the -1 power. That gives a time in
   years. Second, the stuff inside the natural log is unitless
   (you can’t take the natural log of something with units). Now I
   can put in my value for N‘ and I get a year value of t = 37.653
   years (or the year 2037). So at that point, I will be basically
   taking pictures all day long and not have any time to ride in
   my jet pack. That’s going to suck. No really, this is just a
   model. Clearly it won’t work for large values of t. At some
   point I am going to just max out on pictures (maybe like 100 a
   day).



