  Flying Over the Jungle

   Despite the complexity of perfectoid spaces, Scholze is known
   for the clarity of his talks and papers. “I don’t really
   understand anything until Peter explains it to me,” Weinstein
   said.

   Scholze makes a point of trying to explain his ideas at a level
   that even beginning graduate students can follow, Caraiani
   said. “There’s this sense of openness and generosity in terms
   of ideas,” she said. “And he doesn’t just do that with a few
   senior people, but really, a lot of young people have access to
   him.” Scholze’s friendly, approachable demeanor makes him an
   ideal leader in his field, Caraiani said. One time, when she
   and Scholze were on a difficult hike with a group of
   mathematicians, “he was the one running around making sure that
   everyone made it and checking up on everyone,” Caraiani said.

   Yet even with the benefit of Scholze’s explanations, perfectoid
   spaces are hard for other researchers to grasp, Hellmann said.
   “If you move a little bit away from the path, or the way that
   he prescribes, then you’re in the middle of the jungle and it’s
   actually very hard.” But Scholze himself, Hellmann said, “would
   never lose himself in the jungle, because he’s never trying to
   fight the jungle. He’s always looking for the overview, for
   some kind of clear concept.”

   Scholze avoids getting tangled in the jungle vines by forcing
   himself to fly above them: As when he was in college, he
   prefers to work without writing anything down. That means that
   he must formulate his ideas in the cleanest way possible, he
   said. “You have only some kind of limited capacity in your
   head, so you can’t do too complicated things.”

   While other mathematicians are now starting to grapple with
   perfectoid spaces, some of the most far-reaching discoveries
   about them, not surprisingly, have come from Scholze and his
   collaborators. In 2013, a result he posted online “really kind
   of stunned the community,” Weinstein said. “We had no idea that
   such a theorem was on the horizon.”

   [62]Scholze’s result expanded the scope of rules known as
   reciprocity laws, which govern the behavior of polynomials that
   use the arithmetic of a clock (though not necessarily one with
   12 hours). Clock arithmetics (in which, for example, 8 + 5 = 1
   if the clock has 12 hours) are the most natural and widely
   studied finite number systems in mathematics.


   Reciprocity laws are generalizations of the 200-year-old
   quadratic reciprocity law, a cornerstone of number theory and
   one of Scholze’s personal favorite theorems. The law states
   that given two prime numbers p and q, in most cases p is a
   perfect square on a clock with q hours exactly when q is a
   perfect square on a clock with p hours. For example, five is a
   perfect square on a clock with 11 hours, since 5 = 16 = 4^2,
   and 11 is a perfect square on a clock with five hours, since 11
   = 1 = 1^2.

   “I find it very surprising,” Scholze said. “On the face of it,
   these two things seem to have nothing to do with each other.”

   “You can interpret a lot of modern algebraic number theory as
   just attempts to generalize this law,” Weinstein said.

   In the middle of the 20th century, mathematicians discovered an
   astonishing link between reciprocity laws and what seemed like
   an entirely different subject: the “hyperbolic” geometry of
   patterns such as M.C. Escher’s famous [63]angel-devil tilings
   of a disk. This link is a core part of the “Langlands program,”
   a collection of interconnected conjectures and theorems about
   the relationship between number theory, geometry and analysis.
   When these conjectures can be proved, they are often enormously
   powerful: For instance, the proof of Fermat’s Last Theorem
   boiled down to solving one small (but highly nontrivial)
   section of the Langlands program.


   Mathematicians have gradually become aware that the Langlands
   program extends far beyond the hyperbolic disk; it can also be
   studied in higher-dimensional hyperbolic spaces and a variety
   of other contexts. Now, Scholze has shown how to extend the
   Langlands program to a wide range of structures in “hyperbolic
   three-space”—a three-dimensional analogue of the hyperbolic
   disk—and beyond. By constructing a perfectoid version of
   hyperbolic three-space, Scholze has discovered an entirely new
   suite of reciprocity laws.

   “Peter’s work has really completely transformed what can be
   done, what we have access to,” Caraiani said.

   Scholze’s result, Weinstein said, shows that the Langlands
   program is “deeper than we thought … it’s more systematic, it’s
   ever-present.”


