Models and reality

   A model predicts how different HIV/AIDS response scenarios
   would affect new infection rates, or incidence. As seen on the
   map, some areas of the country have far more HIV than others.

   South African HIV and TB Investment Case, SANAC and National
   Department of Health

   South Africa has already made enormous gains against its
   HIV/AIDS epidemic. When it last hosted this international
   gathering in 2000, then-President [58]Thabo Mbeki and his
   health minister questioned whether HIV even causes AIDS,
   triggering widespread outrage. At the time, only the wealthiest
   South Africans had access to ARVs, which cost about $5000 per
   person for an annual supply. But by the end of 2015, the price
   had dropped to $100, and 3.4 million HIV-infected South
   Africans were receiving ARVs—more than in any other country in
   the world. South Africa, in fact, consumes the same amount of
   the life-saving drugs as Asia and the Pacific, North America,
   and western and central Europe combined.


   As a result, life expectancy jumped 9 years between 2005, when
   ARVs started to become widely available, and 2014. The country
   has pioneered innovative ways to deliver the drugs and help
   people stay on them. And South Africa’s strong cadre of
   HIV/AIDS investigators has made the country a hub of
   cutting-edge basic research and clinical trials. “Given our
   resources, we’ve done amazing things,” says Glenda Gray, an
   HIV/AIDS researcher who heads South Africa’s Medical Research
   Council in Cape Town.
   This family tree is derived from the genetic material of
   thousands of HIV isolates from South Africa and it shows how
   the virus has evolved in 5-year periods. The darkest blue dots
   represent sequences from 2010 to 2015 and the lightest dots are
   from 1989.

   This family tree is derived from the genetic material of
   thousands of HIV isolates from South Africa and it shows how
   the virus has evolved in 5-year periods. The darkest blue dots
   represent sequences from 2010 to 2015 and the lightest dots are
   from 1989.

   Andrew Rambaut, Univ. of Edinburgh, and Tulio de Oliveira,
   Africa Centre for Population Health

   Yet almost half the infected population today is still
   untreated. Some have not suffered enough immune damage from the
   virus to merit ARVs under current government policy. Many other
   infected people don’t know their status or never seek care, and
   still others who start treatment have difficulty taking their
   daily pills for years on end. Estimates suggest that because of
   failures in this “care continuum,” only about one in four
   HIV-infected South Africans has fully suppressed the virus. “We
   have to ride two horses at the same time,” says Fareed
   Abdullah, who heads the quasi-governmental South African
   National AIDS Council (SANAC) in Pretoria. “One is to improve
   our system so that the more than 3 million on treatment are
   retained in care and properly managed, and we also have to
   expand to a group that is largely asymptomatic and well.”

   Adding to those challenges is South Africa’s alarming HIV
   incidence—the percentage of the population that becomes
   infected each year. The government reports that HIV incidence
   has dropped from a high of 1.67% in adults in 2005 to 1.22%
   last year, but that still translates into 330,000 new
   infections a year. The rate is shockingly high in women under
   25, especially in the hardest hit province, KwaZulu-Natal,
   where incidence tops 6% in some communities.

   Health Minister [59]Aaron Motsoaledi, who acknowledges that the
   country’s aggressive HIV/AIDS program got off to a late start
   because of Mbeki, is confident that South Africa has the
   willpower and the money to hit 90-90-90. “Can we afford not to
   treat people?” Motsoaledi asks. “Surely, we’re going to pay
   much more dearly socially, politically, and economically if you
   can’t.” To that end, the government, which already spends $1.2
   billion a year on HIV/AIDS and receives another $300 million in
   foreign aid, is adding $65 million annually through 2019.
   As part of an exercise to determine what it could afford, the
   South African government put price tags on the many
   interventions now proven to work.


   As part of an exercise to determine what it could afford, the
   South African government put price tags on the many
   interventions now proven to work.

   South African HIV and TB Investment Case, SANAC and National
   Department of Health

   But a new report concludes that meeting the UNAIDS target will
   require an additional $8 billion over the next 5 years. “UNAIDS
   is pushing very hard on our health ministry, which doesn’t want
   to be caughtshort again and wants to make the case that we can
   reach 90-90-90,” says Linda-Gail Bekker, who co-runs the
   Desmond Tutu HIV Foundation (DTHF) in Cape Town and is one of
   the co-authors of the report. The cost of drugs is just one
   part of the equation, she says. Reaching the target will also
   require massive HIV testing and the costly delivery of ARVs to
   patients who must be monitored and then helped if they’re not
   suppressing the virus. “I’m really, really anxious about the
   resources it’s going to take.”
   There are scientific questions, too. The assumption that
   reaching the 90-90-90 target will end AIDS is based on
   mathematical models that factor in ARV “coverage” in
   combination with other proven prevention strategies like male
   circumcision, condom promotion, and behavior change efforts.
   Researchers note that in large epidemics like the one in South
   Africa, which has spread far beyond “concentrated” populations
   such as men who have sex with men and sex workers, such
   strategies could prove less effective than expected, allowing
   HIV to continue spreading at high rates even after the country
   reaches 90-90-90.

   Epidemiologist Salim Abdool Karim, who runs the Centre for the
   AIDS Programme of Research in South Africa (CAPRISA) in Durban,
   points to recent data from Botswana that call into question the
   model’s assumptions. Botswana, which is relatively wealthy and
   has a tiny population of 2 million, has nearly reached
   90-90-90, as shown in a [60]study published online on 23 March
   in The Lancet. But incidence has barely budged, in part because
   the missing 10-10-10 continue to spread the virus. “For a
   country that’s close to 90-90-90, the incidence is ridiculously
   high,” Karim says. “It’s scandalous.” A report published by
   SANAC and the health department further questions the 90-90-90
   mathematical modeling. Even if 90-90-90 leads to big declines
   in new infections by 2030, that report suggests that incidence
   in South Africa’s population of 53 million will not quite drop
   below 0.1%—the level that UNAIDS says it must reach for an
   epidemic to end.


   The bottom line is that it remains an open question whether the
   90-90-90 treatment goal really can stop the spread of HIV in
   South Africa. Some of the world’s largest controlled trials of
   treatment as prevention (TasP) are underway in the country to
   try to answer it.

   South Africa now treats 3.4 million people with antiretroviral
   drugs, more than any country in the world.

   South Africa now treats 3.4 million people with antiretroviral
   drugs, more than any country in the world.

   James Oatway
   A staffer scans a bottle of pills that he then puts into the
   back of a "Pharmacy Dispensing Unit”—an ATM-like machine that
   may one day be in shopping malls.

   A staffer scans a bottle of pills that he then puts into the
   back of a Pharmacy Dispensing Unit—an ATM that may one day be
   in shopping malls.

   James Oatway
   The robot, made by Germany's Mach 4, helps the busy clinic
   efficiently serve some 600 HIV-infected patients each day.

   The robot, made by Germany's Mach 4, helps the busy clinic
   efficiently serve some 600 HIV-infected patients each day.

   James Oatway
   A robot pulls antiretroviral drugs off the shelf to help Rajan
   Gudala’s pharmacy team at the Themba Lethu Clinic.

   A robot pulls antiretroviral drugs off the shelf to help Rajan
   Gudala’s pharmacy team at the Themba Lethu Clinic.

   James Oatway

   In an area known as Mfekayi in rural KwaZulu-Natal, two dozen
   people are sitting on the shaded porch of a plywood shack
   waiting their turn to see a counselor. The shack is the Egedeni
   Clinic, and the people are participants in a 28,000-person,
   multisite clinical trial that will assess the precise
   relationship between increased levels of HIV suppression in a
   community and drops in incidence. At Egedeni and 10 other
   clinics across the province, the TasP study offers ARVs to all
   infected participants. Another 11 TasP clinics instead offer
   treatment in keeping with current government recommendations,
   meaning that people start ARVs only after their immune systems
   show signs of damage.

   One by one, the participants hand bottles of ARVs they received
   a month earlier to the counselors, who count the remaining
   pills. This ritual, which is a crude way to monitor adherence,
   underscores an obvious limitation of the underlying strategy:
   Even if ARVs make people less infectious, TasP relies on the
   fickle relationship humans have with taking daily medications.

   Run by the Africa Centre for Population Health in nearby
   Mtubatuba, TasP is the furthest along of four similar large
   trials in sub-Saharan Africa that are examining the care
   continuum and the real-world outcome of “universal treatment.”
   Early analysis of TasP results found that fewer than 40% of the
   people who tested positive sought care within 3 months, as
   recommended. This first step still has remained a major
   stumbling block on the road to 90-90-90.

   At the International AIDS Conference later this month, the
   researchers plan to reveal whether their intervention has
   reduced incidence. “This will be the first opportunity to
   assess whether, in fact, the bio-logical rationale is actually
   true in practice,” says Deenan Pillay, a clinical virologist
   who heads the Africa Centre. But Pillay says the study already
   has made clear that ending AIDS is not simply a matter of
   “let’s just treat everyone and everything will be OK.” In the
   final analysis, he says, the power of TasP depends as much on
   human behavior as it does on biology.

   Jacqualine Ncube, a 19-year-old restaurant worker, first took
   an HIV test when she was in high school. At the time, Ncube
   spent many hours after school hanging out at DTHF’s Youth
   Centre, which abuts the struggling township of Masiphumelele
   outside of Cape Town. The Youth Centre offers teens internet
   access, holds soccer matches, loans surfboards, and provides
   care at a health clinic. Kids also earn “Tutus,” good for
   shopping vouchers or food, for every-thing from helping the
   community to taking an HIV test. When Ncube got her first
   results, she was overwhelmed. “I really screamed,” she says.
   She was negative.

   Ncube has repeatedly tested negative, and in April 2015 she
   joined the Youth Centre’s Pillsplus, a study of what’s known as
   pre-exposure prophylaxis, or PrEP, in 150 teens. With PrEP,
   uninfected people take daily ARV pills to prevent infection.
   Although PrEP is a proven strategy, South Africa recommends its
   use only in sex workers, and Ncube is one of the first
   hetero-sexual teens in the world to take ARVs for prevention.
   She still uses condoms with her boyfriend, but says she wanted
   to try PrEP because “no protection is 100%.”

   DTHF’s Bekker, who is heading Pillsplus to assess PrEP’s
   acceptability in teens, contends that PrEP should be provided
   to all people at high risk of infection. “When I sit opposite a
   17-year-old young woman, I have nothing to offer her,” Bekker
   says.

   CAPRISA’s Karim says using PrEP in young women could be key to
   breaking the epidemic’s back. About 30% of new infections in
   South Africa occur in young women between 15 and 24 years of
   age. The new infection rate in men in the same age bracket is
   more than four times lower. In some districts of KwaZulu-Natal,
   a woman has a 60% chance of becoming infected by age 34.


