Thomas C. Schelling, Nobel Prize-winning game theorist, dies at 95

   By [30]Emily Langer


   December 14, 2016 at 7:01 PM
   Dr. Schelling, left, receives the Nobel Przie from King Carl
   XVI Gustaf of Sweden in Stockholm in 2005. (Anders
   Wiklund/Scanpix via Reuters)

   Thomas C. Schelling, a game theorist who received the Nobel
   Prize in economics for insights that were credited with
   lessening the nuclear threat during the Cold War — and with
   helping explain why some neighborhoods are segregated, why
   smokers struggle so mightily to quit, and why people send
   holiday cards even when they would rather not, died Dec. 13 at
   his home in Bethesda, Md. He was 95.

   The cause was complications from a hip fracture, said his son
   Daniel Schelling.

   Dr. Schelling’s career took him from government to academia and
   across disciplines, including economics, foreign policy, urban
   planning and psychology.

   Trained as an economist, he came of professional age as an
   adviser and analyst during the Truman administration and grew
   fascinated by negotiation during the Cold War confrontation
   between the United States and the Soviet Union. He later taught
   for three decades at Harvard University before retiring in 2003
   from the University of Maryland.

   Dr. Schelling was best known for his application and
   elaboration of game theory, the mathematical study of
   decision-making amid conflict. For policymakers engaged with
   the Soviets and for experts who sought to analyze the standoff,
   his writings — particularly the book “The Strategy of Conflict”
   (1960) — became field guides for averting a nuclear crisis.

   Dr. Schelling looked upon war as bargaining, in which competing
   sides are influenced by incentives and deterrents, promises and
   threats, and the abundance or dearth of information. Among his
   insights was the idea that a party to a conflict may make
   itself stronger by reducing its own options.

   For example, a president limited by legislative oversight may
   be stronger at a negotiating table than a president with no
   oversight. The adversary knows that the president with limited
   authority is not fully free to act as he or she pleases.
   Therefore, the adversary cannot reasonably demand as much as he
   or she might want.

   To improve communications between the United States and the
   Soviet Union, he was reportedly among the government advisers
   who recommended the “hotline” connecting Washington and Moscow
   that was established in 1963.

   Dr. Schelling also demonstrated “that the capability to
   retaliate can be more useful than the ability to resist an
   attack, and that uncertain retaliation is more credible and
   more efficient than certain retaliation,” the Royal Swedish
   Academy of Sciences observed in announcing Dr. Schelling’s
   Nobel Prize. “These insights have proven to be of great
   relevance for conflict resolution and efforts to avoid war.”

   The citation honored Dr. Schelling and the Israeli economist
   Robert J. Aumann, who shared the economics prize in 2005, with
   “having enhanced our understanding of conflict and cooperation
   through game-theory analysis.”

   (Asked at the time by the Baltimore Sun whether he considered
   himself an economist, Dr. Schelling quipped that although much
   of his work lay outside the field of economics, as it was
   strictly defined, he “could still pass the Ph.D.
   examinations.”)

   Dr. Schelling was drawn to game theory in part because of its
   wide-ranging applications. It “can be used,” he observed, “if
   you try to discipline a child or deal with employees, or
   employers or neighbors.”

   In the 1970s, he used game theory to show how some
   neighborhoods became racially segregated, even when their
   residents say that they do not object to integration.

   “Whites and blacks may not mind each other’s presence, may even
   prefer integration, but may nevertheless wish to avoid minority
   status,” he wrote in “Micromotives and Macrobehavior,” first
   published in 1978. “Except for a mixture at exactly 50:50, no
   mixture will then be self-sustaining because there is none
   without a minority, and if the minority evacuates, complete
   segregation occurs.”

   The concept of a “tipping” point, as elaborated by Dr.
   Schelling, was later popularized by best-selling author Malcolm
   Gladwell.

   Dr. Schelling explored not only conflicts between warring
   parties, but also those within oneself, such as the battle
   fought by a smoker who promises to stop the habit, only to
   continually indulge in one “last” cigarette.

   “Just as it may be easier to ban nuclear weapons from the
   battlefield in toto than through carefully graduated
   specifications on their use, zero is a more enforceable limit
   on cigarettes or chewing gum than some flexible quantitative
   ration,” he wrote in “Choice and Consequence: Perspective of an
   Errant Economist” (1984).

   He confessed that he could personally attest to the validity of
   the principle, having unsuccessfully tried to quit tobacco by
   allowing it to himself after an “evening meal.” “It stimulated
   a lot of token sandwiches,” he wrote.

   Thomas Crombie Schelling was born in Oakland, Calif., on April
   14, 1921. His father was a Naval officer, and his mother, a
   former teacher, was a homemaker. He received a bachelor’s
   degree in economics from the University of California at
   Berkeley in 1944 and, after working in Europe for the Marshall
   Plan, a PhD in economics from Harvard in 1951.

   Before being awarded the Nobel, Dr. Schelling was not
   overwhelmingly recognized among economists. “Perhaps because he
   stayed away from the Journal of Advanced Economic Gobbledygook,
   Schelling’s pathbreaking conceptual work received less
   attention from his home discipline that it deserved,” Richard
   Zeckhauser, a former student and colleague, wrote in a tribute
   to Dr. Schelling in 1989.

   He did, however, receive attention from filmmaker Stanley
   Kubrick, who read Dr. Schelling’s 1960 article “[31]Meteors,
   Mischief and Wars” analyzing several novels that conjured up
   the outbreak of nuclear war.


   One of those novels was “Red Alert” by Peter Bryant, later
   adapted by Kubrick into the Cold War-satire “Dr. Strangelove
   or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb” (1964).
   Dr. Schelling acted as a consultant on the film.

   In the movie, the Soviets deploy a “doomsday device” programmed
   to detonate in the event of an attack. Speaking to the New York
   Times, Dr. Schelling enunciated in terms of game theory the
   film’s central joke: “One obvious point in the Strangelove
   movie was that the Soviet doomsday thing was not a deterrent
   . . . when the other side did not know in advance that it
   existed.”

   Dr. Schelling’s first marriage, to Corinne Saposs, ended in
   divorce. Survivors include his wife of 25 years, Alice Coleman
   Schelling of Bethesda; four sons from his first marriage,
   Andrew Schelling of Boulder, Colo., Tom Schelling of Ashland,
   Mass., Daniel Schelling of Salt Lake City and Robert Schelling
   of Putney, Vt.; two stepsons, David Coleman of Mountain View,
   Calif., and Robert Coleman of Portland, Ore.; a sister; 12
   grandchildren; and three great-grandchildren.

   Dr. Schelling said that he was “by temperament” an optimist.
   But even he remarked, in his Nobel lecture, that “the most
   spectacular event of the past half-century is one that did not
   occur. We have enjoyed 60 years without nuclear weapons
   exploded in anger.”

   In a career devoted to such consequential matters, he found
   time to extract meaning from more mundane events, such as the
   custom of exchanging holiday cards. No matter how overwhelmed
   many people may be with preparations for festivities, no matter
   how little they may wish to write, address, stamp and send the
   cards, they continue the tradition.

   It was, he said, a matter of game theory (if not a point of
   holiday cheer).

   “Sensible people who might readily agree to stop bothering each
   other with Christmas cards,” he wrote, “find it embarrassing,
   or not quite worth the trouble, to reach such agreement.”

   Read more [32]Washington Post obituaries
     __________________________________________________________


   Emily Langer is a reporter on The Washington Post’s obituaries
   desk. She has written about national and world leaders,
   celebrated figures in science and the arts, and heroes from all
   walks of life.
   Post Recommends
   Outbrain

   YOU'VE READ YOUR MONTHLY LIMIT
   OF FREE ARTICLES


