[247]Author Interviews


[248]'Hidden Figures': How Black Women Did The Math That Put Men On
The Moon


   Shetterly grew up in the 1960s in Hampton, Va., not far from
   NASA's Langley Research Center. She's African-American, and her
   father, extended family and neighbors were all scientists,
   physicists and engineers at NASA. But it wasn't until about six
   years ago that she understood the magnitude of the work black
   women were doing there. She recently [249]told NPR's Michel
   Martin, "I knew that many of them worked at NASA. I didn't know
   exactly what they did."


   Shetterly spent the next six years searching for more
   information. She researched archives and interviewed former and
   current NASA employees and family members. In her book, she
   details the journeys and personal lives of Langley's star
   mathematicians, and recounts how women computers — both black
   and white — broke barriers in both science and society.

   "They were dreamers"

   In the film Hidden Figures, Oscar-winning actress Octavia
   Spencer plays [250]Dorothy Vaughan, NASA's first
   African-American supervisor. The movie shows a tenacious
   Vaughan insisting that her title reflect the supervisory work
   she was already doing.


   When Spencer first heard the film pitch, she says, she thought
   it was fiction. "And then when I realized it wasn't fiction, it
   was even more imperative to be a part of the story. ... They
   were highly educated and they were moms and they were dreamers
   and they had fierce natures. And so there was so much about who
   they were that wasn't lost on me."
   [251]Enlarge this image


   "They were moms and they were dreamers and they had fierce
   natures," says actress Octavia Spencer (center). She plays NASA
   supervisor Dorothy Vaughan alongside Taraji P. Henson (left) as
   mathematician Katherine Johnson and Janelle Monáe (right) as
   engineer Mary Jackson. Hopper Stone/Twentieth Century Fox hide
   caption
   toggle caption
   Hopper Stone/Twentieth Century Fox

   "They were moms and they were dreamers and they had fierce
   natures," says actress Octavia Spencer (center). She plays NASA
   supervisor Dorothy Vaughan alongside Taraji P. Henson (left) as
   mathematician Katherine Johnson and Janelle Monáe (right) as
   engineer Mary Jackson.
   Hopper Stone/Twentieth Century Fox

   Taraji P. Henson plays Katherine Johnson, an extraordinary
   mathematician who calculated the trajectories for Glenn's
   Friendship 7 mission. (Johnson also worked on the Apollo and
   space shuttle programs.) Sitting in her trailer after shooting
   a scene in which Johnson explains a difficult equation to her
   perplexed male colleagues, Henson confesses that in real life,
   "Math and science scares me. It makes my heart palpitate."

   Henson remembers feeling a little angry when she first learned
   about Johnson's achievements. "The world needs to know her,"
   she says. " ... Whenever I watch any footage of anything about
   NASA, you see men. You see a smoke-filled room full of suits
   and ties. You never see women."

   Singer and actress Janelle Monáe cried when she first read the
   script. She plays Mary Jackson, who, [252]according to NASA,
   "may have been the only black female aeronautical engineer in
   the field" in the 1950s. Monáe says, "I was really upset
   because, as an African-American young woman, I had no idea who
   Mary Jackson was, who Dorothy Vaughan was, who Katherine
   Johnson was, who the colored 'computers' were. I had no idea.
   And I'm just like: This clearly had to be a mistake. These are
   American heroes. Without their brains, without their hard work
   and dedication to NASA and the long hours that they worked
   together, we would have not made it into space. We would have
   not made it into orbit."


   In the film, Monáe's character is portrayed as feisty and
   unstoppable. She's furious when she learns that the courses she
   needs to advance her career are only taught at Hampton's
   all-white high school. "Every time we have a chance to get
   ahead, they move the finish line," Jackson bemoans. "Every
   time."

   In real life, Jackson petitioned the city to let her attend. As
   Shetterly writes, "Mary was seeking to make herself more useful
   to her country, and yet it was she who had to go hat in hand to
   the school board. It was a grit-your-teeth, close-your-eyes,
   take-a-deep-breath kind of indignity. However, there was never
   any doubt in Mary's mind that it must be done."
   [253]Enlarge this image


   Katherine Johnson, seen here in 2008, calculated the
   trajectories for John Glenn's historic Friendship 7 mission.
   Courtesy NASA Langley hide caption
   toggle caption
   Courtesy NASA Langley

   Katherine Johnson, seen here in 2008, calculated the
   trajectories for John Glenn's historic Friendship 7 mission.
   Courtesy NASA Langley

   "It's our story"

   At 98, Katherine Johnson is the only surviving "hidden figure"
   featured in the movie. (Mary Jackson died in 2005, and Dorothy
   Vaughan in 2008.) In 2015, President Obama awarded Johnson the
   Presidential Medal of Freedom for her 33-year career at
   Langley.

   Today, with her daughters by her side, Johnson seems bemused by
   all the fuss around the new movie. When asked about her role in
   Glenn's historic mission, she says, "It was just an assignment.
   I'm accustomed to being asked something and I, of course,
   answered to the best of my ability and hoped that's the answer
   they were looking for."

   Johnson, who became a high school freshman at age 10, says she
   always liked learning. She's concerned about today's youth
   relying so heavily on the Internet for information. "They're
   hurt and don't know it," she says quietly. "They're not using
   their brain. ... And you've got to use your brain for it to
   grow and for things to be learned."

   Twentieth Century Fox is seizing every opportunity to show
   Hidden Figures to the audiences most affected by the human
   computers' achievements. There have been screenings at the
   Smithsonian's new National Museum of African American History
   and Culture, and for the National Society of Black Engineers.

   Actress Octavia Spencer has attended many of these screenings.
   She's discouraged that, even today, more young women aren't
   going into STEM-related fields. "Young girls have now been
   taught that it's not cool. I mean, our culture is sexualizing
   everything in a way that, well, if you have a brain, it's just
   ... " Spencer shakes her head in frustration. "Dorothy and
   Katherine and Mary are important because young girls need to
   know that it's really wonderful if you're inclined in any of
   those disciplines. It's wonderful because we need it."

   I feel Mary in my spirit. She went after it. She didn't let
   anything stop her. Not even her husband.

   Julie Byrd-Williams, senior systems analyst at NASA

   After a screening for NASA employees, senior systems analyst
   Julie Williams-Byrd, who is African-American, beamed. "I loved
   it," she says. She likes that the movie showed what these women
   were going through as they were making history, whether it was
   motherhood or having to run across Langley's campus to use the
   segregated bathroom. Williams-Byrd was particularly taken with
   Mary Jackson. "I feel Mary in my spirit. She went after it. She
   didn't let anything stop her. Not even her husband," she says
   with a laugh. " ... And that's one thing that we need to tell
   our young people. You know, 'Don't let anything stop you. If
   you've got a vision, go for it. Go for it. You can do it.' "

   African-American astronaut Yvonne Cagle had a fitting reaction
   to the film. "I feel totally lifted up and off the planet," she
   says. Cagle is also a retired Air Force colonel and flight
   surgeon. "It's my story. It's your story. It's our story. It's
   a conversation that talks about: Even with limited thinking,
   dreaming is limitless." For Cagle, the movie affirmed her
   belief that "if you prepare and you persevere, anything is
   possible."




    [257] javascript:void(0);

   NPR thanks our sponsors

   [258]Become an NPR sponsor
















































   IFRAME:
   [303]//20655831p.rfihub.com/ca.html?rb=3035&ca=20501671&ra=gtmc
   b


   [tr?id=1621557368158968&ev=PageView&noscript=1]


