You've read your last complimentary article this month.

   [5]Subscribe to The New Yorker for only $1 a week. Plus, get a
   free tote.
   Already a subscriber?
   Sign in
   Katherine Johnson (Taraji P. Henson), Dorothy Vaughan (Octavia
   Spencer), and Mary Jackson (Janelle Monáe), in “Hidden
   Figures.” Credit PHOTOGRAPH BY HOPPER STONE / TWENTIETH CENTURY
   FOX &&


   The basic virtue of “Hidden Figures” (which opens on December
   25th), and it’s a formidable one, is to proclaim with a clarion
   vibrancy that, were it not for the devoted, unique, and
   indispensable efforts of three black women scientists, the
   United States might not have successfully sent people into
   space or to the moon and back. The movie is set mainly in 1961
   and 1962, in Virginia, where a key NASA research center was
   (and is) based, and the movie is aptly and thoroughly derisive
   toward the discriminatory laws and practices that prevailed at
   the time.

   The insults and indignities that black residents of Virginia,
   and black employees of NASA, unremittingly endured are integral
   to the drama. Those segregationist rules and norms—and the
   personal attitudes and actions that sustained them—are unfolded
   with a clear, forceful, analytical, and unstinting specificity.
   The efforts of black Virginians to cope with relentless ambient
   racism and, where possible, to point it out, resist it,
   overcome it, and even defeat it are the focus of the drama.
   “Hidden Figures” is a film of calm and bright rage at the way
   things were—an exemplary reproach to the very notion of
   political nostalgia. It depicts repugnant attitudes and
   practices of white supremacy that poisoned earlier generations’
   achievements and that are inseparable from those achievements.

   “Hidden Figures” is a subtle and powerful work of
   counter-history, or, rather, of a finally and long-deferred
   accurate history, that fills in the general outlines of these
   women’s roles in the space program. Its redress of the record
   begins in West Virginia in 1926, where the sixth-grade math
   prodigy Katherine Coleman is given a scholarship to a school
   that one of her teachers refers to as the only one in the
   region for black children that goes beyond the eighth grade.
   She quickly displays her genius there—but the school’s narrow
   horizons suggests the sharply limited opportunities for black
   people over all.

   The nature of those limits is indicated in the very next scene,
   which cuts ahead to a lonely road in Virginia in 1961. There, a
   car is stalled, its hood open. Katherine is there with her two
   other African-American friends and colleagues. She’s sitting
   pensively in the passenger seat; Dorothy Vaughan (Octavia
   Spencer) is beneath the engine, trying to fix it; and Mary
   Jackson (Janelle Monáe) is standing impatiently beside the car.
   A police cruiser approaches. They tense up; Dorothy says, “No
   crime in a broken-down car,” and Mary responds, “No crime being
   Negro, neither.” Their fearful interaction with the officer—a
   white man, of course, with a billy club in hand and a
   condescending bearing—is resolved with a comedic moment brought
   about by the women’s deferential irony. What emerges, however,
   is nothing less than an instance in a reign of terror.

   Dorothy is the manager and de-facto supervisor of a group of
   “computers”—about thirty black women, all skilled
   mathematicians—that includes Katherine and Mary. Dorothy is
   awaiting a formal promotion to supervisor, but a talk with a
   senior administrator makes clear that it’s not to be; the clear
   but unspoken reason is her race. (Tellingly, Dorothy addresses
   that official, played by Kirsten Dunst, as “Mrs. Mitchell,”
   who, in turn, calls her by her first name.) Mary, endowed with
   engineering skill, is summoned to a team led by an engineer
   named Zielinski (Olek Krupa), a Polish-Jewish émigré who
   escaped the Holocaust and who encourages her to seek formal
   certification as an engineer. To do so, Mary will have to take
   additional classes—but the only school that offers them is a
   segregated one, whites-only, from which she’s barred.

   When NASA astronauts ceremoniously arrive at the research
   center, the black women “computers” are forced to stand
   together as a separate group, conspicuously divided from the
   other scientists. (Only John Glenn, played by Glen Powell,
   greets them, and does so warmly, shaking their hands and
   lingering to chat with them about their work.)

   As for Katherine—now Katherine Goble, the widowed mother of
   three young girls—she’s plucked from the pool of mathematicians
   to join the main research group, headed by Al Harrison (Kevin
   Costner). There, she’s the only black person and the only woman
   (other than the secretary, played by Kimberly Quinn). She once
   again rapidly displays her mathematical genius, but not before
   being taken for the department custodian; forced to drink from
   a coffeepot labelled “colored”; treated dismissively by the
   lead researcher, Paul Stafford (Jim Parsons); and compelled to
   walk a half-mile to her former office in order to use the
   “colored ladies’ room.” (Moreover, the contrast between that
   depleted and dilapidated facility and the well-appointed and
   welcoming white-women’s bathroom proves the meaning of
   “separate but unequal.”)

   Each of the three women has a particular conflict to confront,
   a particular focus in the struggle for equality. Mary’s
   struggle takes place in a public forum: she petitions a
   Virginia state court for permission to take the needed night
   classes in a segregated school. She’s not represented by a
   lawyer, and speaks on her own behalf; but, rather than making
   her case in open court, she makes a personal plea to the judge
   that’s as much about him and his outlook as it is about her,
   and her work and its usefulness. What her plea isn’t about is
   law, rights, or justice.

   The omission is no accident; it’s set up by dramatic contrast
   with the angry insistence of Mary’s husband, Levi (Aldis
   Hodge), a civil-rights activist, that she not bother pursuing a
   job as an engineer: “You can’t apply for freedom. . . . It’s
   got to be demanded, taken.” Mary says that there’s “more than
   one way” to get opportunities, but the deck of this debate is
   stacked by the terms in which Levi couches it, saying that
   there’s no such thing as a woman engineer—at least, not a black
   one—and blaming her for not being home often enough to take
   proper care of their children.

   Dorothy’s pursuit of a formal promotion to supervisor also
   takes place against the backdrop of the civil-rights movement.
   She learns that her entire department of human “computers” will
   soon be replaced by an electronic computer—an enormous I.B.M.
   mainframe that’s being installed. A gifted technician, Dorothy
   seeks out a book from the local library (a segregated library
   from which she’s thrown out), in which she’ll learn the
   programming language Fortran; she soon becomes NASA’s resident
   expert. On that trip to the library, in the company of her two
   sons on the cusp of adolescence, they witness a protest by
   civil-rights activists chanting “segregation must go” and see
   police officers, with police dogs, approaching the protesters.
   Dorothy and her sons pause and look, until she tells them to
   “pay attention that we’re not part of that trouble.” But,
   sitting in the back of the bus with them, she emphasizes that
   “separate and equal aren’t the same thing,” and adds, “If you
   act right, you are right.”

   Katherine, too, fights for her dignity and for opportunities at
   work. Her calculations very soon prove indispensable to the
   effort to put the first American astronaut, Alan Shepard, into
   outer space. (The scene in which she displays her calculations
   to the entire office of scientists features a small but
   brilliant stroke of film editing, which suggests that she
   envisioned the effect of that bold step before she took it.)
   She’s fighting prejudice against blacks, against women (none
   has ever been admitted to a Pentagon briefing, where she can
   get the information she needs for her analyses), and against
   bureaucracy itself. Paul, who has been the department’s
   resident genius, and to whom she reports, is resentful of his
   subordinate—a black woman, for good measure—outshining him in
   mathematical talent and analytical insight.

   Eventually, upbraided by the head of the department, Al, in the
   presence of the entire staff, Katherine explodes with rage,
   setting forth the full litany of indignities to which she’s
   subjected because of her skin color, before storming out. But
   this sublimely righteous outburst is posed on a solid
   meritocratic basis. Katherine isn’t the only black woman to
   have worked in the main research department under Al; there has
   been a veritable parade of black women “computers” stationed in
   that department, and each has been found wanting and has been
   sent back to the pool. As a result, none has effected any
   change in the status of black employees or of women at NASA.
   Katherine’s outburst is effective because Katherine, unlike her
   predecessors, is indispensable. Taking her claims to heart, Al
   plays a heroic role, championing Katherine’s work and treating
   her with due respect—but his heroism is a conditional and
   practical one, spurred by his single-minded devotion to the
   space program.

   In “Hidden Figures,” the civil-rights movement isn’t just a
   barely sketched backdrop; it’s in virtual competition with the
   efforts in personal advancement and achievement heroically made
   by the three women at the center of the film. In the movie, the
   three women never speak directly of civil rights. In the
   warmhearted romance at the center of the movie—Katherine’s
   relationship with Col. Jim Johnson (Mahershala Ali)—the subject
   never comes up. (Katherine Johnson is now ninety-eight; a title
   card at the end of the film declares that she and Johnson
   recently celebrated their fifty-sixth wedding anniversary.) The
   movie presents three women whose life experiences have been
   extraordinary; their work, their personal lives, and their
   struggle for justice are uncompromisingly heroic. What the
   movie is missing, above all, is their voices.

   These women are not in any way submissive or passive. On the
   contrary, each one speaks up and takes action at great personal
   risk. (For instance, Dorothy steals a book that the library
   won't let her borrow and then speaks sharply to the guard who
   hustles her and her sons out.) The movie's emphasis on
   individual action and achievement in the face of vast obstacles
   is both beautiful and salutary, but its near-effacement of
   collective organization and political activity at a time when
   they were at their historical apogee—for that matter, its
   elision of politics as such—narrows the drama and, all the more
   grievously, the characters at its center.

   What the women at the center of “Hidden Figures” lived through
   in their youth, in the deep age of Jim Crow, and, later, at a
   time of protest and of legal change, remains unspoken; their
   wisdom and insight remain unexpressed. For all the emotional
   power and historical redress of the movie—above all, in the
   simple recognition of the centrality of its three protagonists
   to the modern world—it pushes to the fore a moderation, based
   solely on personal accomplishment, in pursuit of justice. This
   is different from the civil-rights goal of a universal equality
   based on humanity alone, extended to the ordinary as well as to
   the exceptional. This is, by no means, a complaint about the
   real-life people on whom the movie is based; it’s purely a
   matter of aesthetics, a result of decisions by the director and
   screenwriter, Theodore Melfi, and his co-writer, Allison
   Schroeder, about how they imagined and developed the
   characters. (I found myself thinking, by contrast, of recently
   published [6]stories by the late filmmaker Kathleen Collins,
   with their incisive observations regarding participants and
   observers of civil-rights activism.)


   Melfi and Schroeder are white; perhaps they conceived the film
   to be as nonthreatening to white viewers as possible, or
   perhaps they anticipated that it would be released at a time of
   promised progress. Instead, it’s being released in a time of
   resurgent, unabashed racism. The time for protest has returned;
   for all the inspired celebration of hitherto unrecognized black
   heroes that “Hidden Figures” offers, and all the retrospective
   outrage that “Hidden Figures” sparks, I can only imagine the
   movie as it might have been made, much more amply,
   imaginatively, and resonantly, linking history and the present
   tense, by Ava DuVernay or Spike Lee, Julie Dash or Charles
   Burnett.

   The basic virtue of “Hidden Figures” (which opens on December
   25th), and it’s a formidable one, is to proclaim with a clarion
   vibrancy that, were it not for the devoted, unique, and
   indispensable efforts of three black women scientists, the
   United States might not have successfully sent people into
   space or to the moon and back. The movie is set mainly in 1961
   and 1962, in Virginia, where a key NASA research center was
   (and is) based, and the movie is aptly and thoroughly derisive
   toward the discriminatory laws and practices that prevailed at
   the time.
   You have reached your {{activeMeter.max}} free articles this
   month.
   Login to read more!

   Richard Brody began writing for The New Yorker in 1999, and has
   contributed articles about the directors François Truffaut,
   Jean-Luc Godard, and Samuel Fuller. He writes about movies in
   his blog for newyorker.com. He is the author of “Everything Is
   Cinema: The Working Life of Jean-Luc Godard.”[7]More »


   © 2016 The New Yorker


