[230]Books


A Hero For The Arts And Sciences: Upcoming Marvel Covers Promote
STEAM Fields





    [234] javascript:void(0);

   August 28, 20167:38 AM ET

   Jason Slotkin
   [235]Enlarge this image


   Invincible Iron Man — featuring the debut of a new hero, Riri
   Williams — is one five books Marvel is using to promote
   science, math, and arts disciplines through a series of covers.
   Courtesy of Marvel hide caption
   toggle caption
   Courtesy of Marvel

   Invincible Iron Man — featuring the debut of a new hero, Riri
   Williams — is one five books Marvel is using to promote
   science, math, and arts disciplines through a series of covers.
   Courtesy of Marvel

   Typically superheroes spend their summertime helming big budget
   franchises for movie studios. This year, with blockbuster
   season winding down and schools opening their doors, Marvel's
   following up its summer at the multiplex by giving its
   superheroes [236]a new assignment.


   Last week, the publisher unveiled the last of five special
   covers featuring disciplines that guide school curricula
   nationwide — Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Math,
   also known as STEAM. It's part of an effort, the company says,
   to encourage young readers to double-down on their studies and
   explore fields said to lead to better jobs.

   "We plan to continue to motivate our fans to explore their
   passions in the fields of science, technology, engineering,
   art, and math and present these disciplines through some of our
   favorite young heroes who are doing just that — following their
   dreams and preparing for the challenges that await them ahead,"
   David Gabriel, Senior VP for Sales & Marketing of Marvel Comics
   said in a statement.

   Available in November, the covers are alternative prints of
   several titles. Famous heroes such as the Hulk and Spiderman
   make appearances. So do lesser-knowns Gwenpool — an amalgam of
   Spiderman's Gwen Stacy and meta-jokester Deadpool — and kid
   genius Moongirl.

   The covers also coincide with the debut of Marvel's new
   [237]Iron Man, Riri Williams, a 15-year-old engineering
   prodigy, who is also featured.


   Moongirl and Spiderman. Courtesy of Marvel hide caption
   toggle caption
   Courtesy of Marvel

   Readers may notice that Marvel's tapped a diverse field of
   heroes for the covers — characters Riri Williams and Moongirl
   are African-American, and Spiderman Miles Morales is of
   Hispanic and African-American descent — all working in fields
   in which educators and officials say [238]women and minorities
   are underrepresented.


   "The media literally shapes what people aspire to be," said
   Virginia Booth Womack, president of [239]the National
   Association of Multicultural Engineering Program Advocates.


   Womack also oversees recruitment and retainment efforts for
   students from underrepresented communities at Purdue
   University's College of Engineering. She says part of getting
   students to feel like they belong involves seeing people who
   look like them engaged in their field, in their own communities
   and the wider culture.

   "The power that the media has to give students the opportunity
   to emulate is huge," Womack says.

   Keri Randolph, director of Innovation for Hamilton County
   Schools in Chattanooga, Tenn., says one thing she loves about
   the comics is they're depicting women and minorities.

   The other, she says, is that the comics are putting science
   upfront for students.

   "When you go to the movies or read a comic there's such a
   suspension of disbelief. We don't necessarily pause and go:
   'that already exists or it could exist,'" says Randolph.
   [240]Can Songs Help You Learn Scientific Concepts?



