Why Infinity Is No Ordinary Number

   The idea of infinity is easy to come up with, but we must be
   careful what we do with it.
   by [22]Eugenia Cheng, on March 24, 2017


   The following is an excerpt from [23]Beyond Infinity: An
   Expedition to the Outer Limits of Mathematics, by Eugenia Cheng


   Mathematics can be thought of as many things: a language, a
   tool, a game. It might not seem like a game when you’re trying
   to do your homework or pass an exam, but for me one of the most
   exciting parts of doing research is when you’re just starting
   something new and you get to play around with some ideas for
   fun. It’s a bit like playing around with ingredients in the
   kitchen, which is more fun than trying to write down the recipe
   you invented in case you want to repeat it. And that is in turn
   more fun than trying to write down the recipe for someone else
   to be able to repeat.

   I’m going to start by playing around with the idea of infinity
   a bit, to free our brains up and start exploring what we think
   might be true about it and what the consequences are.
   Mathematics is all about using logic to understand things, and
   we’ll find that if we’re not careful about exactly what we mean
   by “infinity,” then logic will take us to some very strange
   places that we didn’t intend to go. Mathematicians start by
   playing around with ideas to get a feel for what might be
   possible, good and bad. When Lego was first made, the designers
   must have played around with some prototypes first before
   settling on the wonderful final design.

   [[24]Mathematician Eugenia Cheng discusses the complex
   conundrums of infinity.]


   A mathematical “toy” should be like Lego: strong enough to be
   able to build things, but versatile enough to open up many
   possibilities. If we come up with a prototype for infinity that
   causes something important to collapse, then we have to go back
   to the drawing board. After our initial games we’ll be going
   back to the drawing board several times as we move through
   different ways of thinking about infinity that go wrong and
   cause things to collapse. When we finally get to something that
   holds up, it might not look the way you were expecting. And it
   causes some things to happen that you might not have been
   expecting either, like the weird fact that there are different
   sizes of infinity, so that some things are “more infinite” than
   others. This is a beautiful aspect of any kind of
   journey—discovering things you weren’t expecting.

   In the previous chapter I listed some beginning ideas about
   infinity.

   Infinity goes on forever.

   Does this mean infinity is a type of time, or space? A length?

   Infinity is bigger than the biggest number.
   Infinity is bigger than anything we can think of.

   Now infinity seems to be a type of size. Or is it something
   more abstract: a number, which we can then use to measure time,
   space, length, size, and indeed anything we want? Our next
   thoughts seem to treat infinity as if it is in fact a number.

   If you add one to infinity it’s still infinity.

   This is saying

   ∞ + 1 = ∞

   which might seem like a very basic principle about infinity. If
   infinity is the biggest thing there is, then adding one can’t
   make it any bigger. Or can it? What if we then subtract
   infinity from both sides? If we use some familiar rules of
   cancellation, this will just get rid of the infinity on each
   side, leaving

   1 = 0

   which is a disaster. Something has evidently gone wrong. The
   next thought makes more things go wrong:

   If you add infinity to infinity it’s still infinity.

   This seems to be saying

   ∞ + ∞ = ∞

   that is,

   2∞ = ∞

   and now if we divide both sides by infinity this might look
   like we can just cancel out the infinity on each side, leaving

   2 = 1

   which is another disaster. Maybe you can now guess that
   something terrible will happen if we think too hard about the
   last idea:

   If you multiply infinity by infinity it’s still infinity.

   If we write this out we get

   ∞ x ∞ = ∞

   and if we divide both sides by infinity, canceling out one
   infinity on each side, we get

   ∞ = 1

   which is possibly the worst, most wrong outcome of them all.
   Infinity is supposed to be the biggest thing there is; it is
   definitely not supposed to be equal to something as small as 1.
   [Cheng-Beyond-Infinity-min-245x350.jpg]


