Can You Solve My Problems? by Alex Bellos review – an excellent
anthology, and history, of puzzles

   This skilfully curated collection of conundrums will have you
   kicking yourself










   [135]Simon Singh


   Sunday 6 November 2016 02.29 EST Last modified on Tuesday 2 May
   2017 13.34 EDT

   Reviewing good puzzle books is frustrating, because you get to
   page one of the introduction, find a curious puzzle, become
   engrossed for 20 minutes, miss your stop and then fail to get
   home in time to say goodnight to the kids. Be warned, Alex
   Bellos’s new book could put a strain on your personal life,
   particularly if you are willing to go through the joyful ordeal
   and gleeful torment of solving every single one of his 125
   puzzles.

   I should stress, the prosaically titled Can You Solve My
   Problems? is not just a random list of skull-warping
   brain-teasers, but rather a skilfully curated anthology of
   puzzles, most of them straddling that tricky zone between
   trivial and impossible, and at least half of them guaranteed to
   make you kick yourself. This is a book that should be
   accompanied with a free shin pad.

   In between the puzzles, Bellos takes us back to the origins of
   various types of puzzle and explains their historical
   development. Although this will be familiar material for
   [136]metagrobologists, normal people might not realise that,
   for example, it was [137]Alcuin of York who published one of
   the earliest collections of recreational mathematics (an
   apparent oxymoron that serves as an umbrella term for all types
   of number puzzles).


   [138]Propositiones ad Acuendos Juvenes (or Problems to Sharpen
   the Young) was written in the 8th century and contains 53 (or
   56, depending on the edition) problems, including the first
   example of a river-crossing problem. Bellos’s version of the
   problem is:


     A man arrives at a riverboat with a wolf, a goat and a bunch
     of cabbages. He needs to cross the river, but the one boat
     available can carry only him and a single item at the same
     time. He cannot leave the wolf alone with the goat or the
     goat alone with the cabbages, since in both cases the former
     will eat the latter. How does he cross the river in the
     shortest number of crossings?

   Alcuin is a forgotten hero in the history of mathematics. Prior
   to Bellos’s book, the most important recognition of his
   contribution to the history of puzzles had been in [139]Gone
   Maggie Gone, a 2009 episode of The Simpsons in which Homer
   wants to cross a river, taking Maggie, poison capsules and his
   dog with him.


   Alex bellos

   [140]Facebook [141]Twitter [142]Pinterest


   Alex Bellos: ‘He is correct to view puzzles as wonderful poems
   rather than crass doggerel.’

   If you are struggling with this puzzle, here is a hint. Work
   out which London Underground station has six consecutive
   consonants within a single word. The first of these is the
   first letter of the first item that you need to transport
   across the river in Alcuin’s original version of the problem.

   Once you solve that puzzle, then you can try Alcuin’s saucier
   variation, in which you have to find a way for three men and
   their wives to cross a river in a boat that can carry only two
   people, so that no wife is left alone with a man who is not her
   husband.

   By mixing history with puzzles in this way, we also learn that
   Lewis Carroll (also known as Charles Dodgson, an Oxford
   mathematician) authored three puzzle books and along the way
   invented the classic liar truth-teller conundrums. For example,
   meet Berta, Greta and Rosa:

     Berta says that Greta tells lies. Greta says that Rosa tells
     lies. Rosa says that both Berta and Greta tell lies. Who is
     telling the truth?

     A Nobel laureate inventing puzzles seems like the nerdy
     equivalent of a poet laureate writing dirty limericks

   Such problems might seem frivolous, but the fact that an Oxford
   don would dedicate so much of his life to solving and creating
   puzzles is a clue that we should not dismiss curious
   conundrums. If more evidence is required, then please bear in
   mind that in 2007 in Doctor Who episode 42, the Doctor bemoans
   the fact that recreational mathematics is not studied in
   schools. Fortunately, the Doctor has been well schooled in
   solving mathematical puzzles, and his knowledge of happy primes
   enables him to fire up the back-up engines, thereby preventing
   the SS Pentallian from crashing into the Torajii sun. By the
   way, to find out if a prime number (eg 79) is happy, then take
   the digits (7 and 9), square each one and add the results (49 +
   81 = 130). Take the new number, square each digit again and add
   them (1 + 9 + 0 = 10), and so on (1 + 0 = 1). If you eventually
   end up at 1, then your number is happy. If not, then it is sad.

   Moreover, Bellos reveals how intellectual giants, such as the
   mathematician [143]John Conway, the [144]Bletchley Park
   codebreaker Max Newman, the Nobel physicist [145]George Gamow
   and many other smart cookies, devoted a significant amount of
   their time to playing with puzzles.


   Martin Gardner

   [146]Facebook [147]Twitter [148]Pinterest


   Martin Gardner: ‘one of the great puzzle poets’. Photograph:
   James Gardner

   At first, hearing that a Nobel laureate spends time inventing
   puzzles seems like the nerdy equivalent of learning that the
   poet laureate enjoys writing dirty limericks. But Bellos is
   correct to view puzzles as wonderful poems rather than crass
   doggerel: “With elegance and brevity, they pique our interest,
   kindle our competitive spirit, test our ingenuity, and in some
   cases reveal universal truth.”

   One of the great puzzle poets was [149]Martin Gardner, a
   remarkable polymath whose life is only briefly covered by
   Bellos. Hopefully, readers of Bellos will be sufficiently
   intrigued that they will go on to read Gardner’s autobiography,
   [150]Undiluted Hocus-Pocus, which describes his incredible life
   as a recreational mathematician, magician and rationalist.


   For example, Gardner was one of the few rationalists who
   believed in a personal God and an afterlife. He defended his
   theological views in The Whys of a Philosophical Scrivener, one
   of his hundred or so books. Unfortunately, the 500-page tome
   was torn to shreds when it was reviewed in the New York Review
   of Books by a critic named George Groth. Groth, it turned out,
   was Gardner himself, destroying his own book.

   Perhaps the greatest compliment I can give to this book is that
   when my son spotted it on my desk, he started flicking through
   it, furrowing his brow and asking me questions. He had
   remembered that we had already discussed wolves, goats and
   cabbages, he answered a dice question correctly (but for the
   wrong reason) and he had fun exploring some of the simpler
   arithmetic puzzles. There is a small chance that perhaps one
   day he will be a mathematician, but whenever I sit with him
   thinking about the same questions, I am certainly transported
   back to my mini-geek self, picking up my first Martin Gardner
   compendium of puzzles.

   Can You Solve My Problems? is published by Guardian Faber
   (£14.99). [151]Click here to buy it for £10.99


   Topics




















