On eliminating lectures, a reality-check: Part 3

   Robert Talbert bio photo By Robert Talbert July 25, 2016
   [10]Comment [11]Tweet [12]Like [13]+1


   That [14]essay titled “Should Colleges Really Eliminate the
   College Lecture?” that appeared in The Atlantic has, so far as
   I have seen, received mostly a well-deserved blanket of
   criticism about most of its main points. This is as it should
   be. I’ve written two pieces so far on this essay — [15]here is
   part 1 and [16]here is part 2 — mostly focusing on
   fact-checking the article, correcting its use of definitions,
   and disentangling some of its more disreputable rhetorical
   devices. This essay is rapidly becoming old news, which is also
   as it should be, so I don’t want to spend much more time on
   this; here I just want to poke a few holes in the main point of
   the article.


   What is that main point, you ask? It’s not the question in the
   headline, first of all. We established in part 1 that there is
   no grand conspiracy among colleges to “eliminate” lecturing,
   and the very examples pulled in to support this claim actually
   refute it. Instead, the main thrust of the article has to do
   with how well instructors in colleges are trained in lecturing.
   The central question the article asks is:

     But is it the college lecture itself that’s the problem — or
     the lecturer?

   Which is amplified in a following paragraph:

     [A]lthough proponents of the movement to move away from the
     lecture [17]cite data on its ineffectiveness, the debate has
     failed to take into account the fact that academics are
     [18]rarely, if ever, formally trained in public speaking.


   This claim is just really strange. We have all this evidence
   stacking up from years of research on pedagogy, a mountain of
   evidence that active learning is better for students, and the
   thing to focus on is training in public speaking? To me this
   seems like looking at study after study of diets composed
   entirely of fast food versus diets with a balance of proteins
   and vegetables, and study after study shows evidence that fast
   food is far more harmful to the human body than the protein and
   vegetable diet — and then criticizing the studies because it
   doesn’t take the training of the fast food worker into account.
   Because, you know, fast food workers are rarely formally
   trained in the culinary arts. And if they were, and those
   dietary studies looked at only the burger-flippers and
   french-fry-makers with real training, then maybe the research
   would tell a much different story, it is claimed.

   Snarkiness aside, I don’t think there is any doubt that
   “academics are rarely formally trained in public speaking”. I
   also don’t think there is any doubt that if you were to receive
   formal training in public speaking, that you would get better
   at public speaking including classroom lecturing. Right? That’s
   how “training” is supposed to work. By the way: What would the
   author of the Atlantic piece say is the best way to receive
   this training? By hearing someone lecture about public
   speaking? Because after all, that would be the most efficient
   way to convey information about the subject. But I digress.

   So it seems that what the author is actually claiming here,
   although it’s between the lines, is that the research on active
   learning doesn’t control for the quality of the lecture (which
   training would improve), and implicit is the claim that if
   those studies did control for quality, we might see a different
   picture emerge. Not to put words in the author’s mouth, but
   this is the only context in which the lengthy digression on
   training in public speaking found in the article has any
   pertinence to the research on active learning and the supposed
   elimination of lecture. (Which isn’t happening.)

   It’s perfectly good scholarship to question the methodology of
   the research and think about confounding variables. So let’s do
   that.

   In the process of writing my upcoming book on flipped learning,
   I’ve gotten the chance to do quite a deep dive into the
   literature on active learning in general, not just the classics
   like the [19]PNAS study or the [20]Hake “6000 student” study
   but many of the smaller, lesser known studies in between. And I
   can say: The author of the Atlantic piece has a point here.
   Most of the studies I’ve read indeed do not control for
   “quality” of instruction. They tend only to examine one form of
   instruction versus another.


   However, it turns out there are at least a couple of good
   reasons for this.

   First: Early studies on active learning that did control for
   lecture “quality” found even the best lectures still had little
   to no effect on student understanding or learning. Take for
   example [21]this early study (from 1980) on student
   preconceptions in introductory mechanics. This was one of the
   studies that eventually led to the invention of peer
   instruction. It showed that even after taking an entire
   university-level course on introductory mechanics, the
   preconceptions of students had about mechanics were basically
   unchanged from the beginning of the course. The course was
   taught entirely via lecture, and importantly:


     The teacher of the course has received consistently high
     praise in written evaluations from students for his clarity
     of presentation, helpfulness, and genuine interest in
     teaching.

   It doesn’t say what kind of training that teacher had, nor does
   it really matter. This was a skilled lecturer who no doubt made
   things interesting, even inspiring, and students liked both him
   and his teaching. And they walked away from a semester with
   this teacher with virtually the same understanding of physics
   as they did when they walked in the door on day 1.

   [22]Another more recent study from 2011 studied student
   learning from two instructional approaches — one using pure
   lecture, the other using a variety of non-lecture,
   research-based practices. Note:


     The control group was lectured by a motivated faculty member
     with high student evaluations and many years of experience
     teaching this course. The experimental group was taught by a
     postdoctoral fellow using instruction based on research on
     learning.

   So, not only was the lecturer giving high-quality lectures, the
   control group instructor was just a postdoctoral student with
   presumably very little training or experience in any kind of
   teaching at all. If the claim in The Atlantic is right, then we
   ought to see at least a “tie” here, with students in both
   groups doing equally well — the experience and skill of the
   excellent lecturer providing at least as much educational value
   as the active learning techniques provided by the instructor
   with far less experience and far less of a track record.

   But of course, that’s not how it worked out. The performance of
   students (measured using the Force Concept Inventory) was
   crazily better in the experimental group than the control
   group, as you can see for yourself when you read the paper.

   I won’t try to be exhaustive here, but suffice to say that
   there are a lot more of these studies where the lecture person
   in the control group was an enthusiastic, skilled lecturer —
   often with multiple teaching awards — and probably someone who
   genuinely liked teaching and cared about students. And yet, it
   ends up making no difference. Active learning wins. So of
   course studies don’t tend to control for “lecture quality”;
   even if we could operationalize what that means, it’s never
   made a difference in the past and so there’s no point in
   controlling for it now.

   Second: The studies that show active learning as being superior
   to pure lecture don’t control for the quality of the active
   learning, either. It is possible to implement active learning
   poorly in your classes. And no doubt, the active learning
   practitioners in these studies must have had good days and bad
   days, just like everybody else. And yet… even with the totality
   of a semester’s worth of instruction, both good and bad, taken
   into account, the results say what they say: Active learning
   wins.

   I think this is a critically important point for those of us
   who don’t wish to stake their careers on having to be a
   consistently great lecturer every single day. If the only
   reliable way for student to learn in a lecture is for me to be
   a great orator every time I step up to the podium, then I for
   one have zero interest in lecturing. Because I am not a great
   orator: I am a human being. Some days I can give great
   lectures. Other days I’m not feeling well; or I’m sleep
   deprived from being up half the night because of a sick kid; or
   I’m distracted by something; or maybe I am just not inspired
   myself by the material.

   Our students need a learning environment that is supported by
   an instructor but which does not depend on the instructor
   bringing his or her “A” game to every class meeting. This is
   what active learning provides. It is what lecturing most
   definitely does not provide, and “more training” won’t change
   this.

   I have one more part in mind for this response, to address some
   of the wild and crazy claims about flipped learning that take
   place later in the article. At this point I’m not so much
   responding to the article as I am to those claims, which seem
   to come up again and again like those prank birthday candles
   that keep igniting once you’ve blown them out. I don’t have any
   illusions that my blog will put them out for good, but I have
   to try.
   Please enable JavaScript to view the [23]comments powered by
   Disqus. [24]comments powered by Disqus
   [25]Previous [26]Next


   © 2017 Robert Talbert. Powered by [27]Jekyll using the [28]So
   Simple Theme.



