‘A whole new world': Duke biologists investigate bacterial evolution

   By [11]Nathan Luzum | Thursday, March 30






   [16]e_coli_bacteria_16578744517
   Courtesy of Wikimedia Commons


   The scientists developed a mathematical tool to accurately
   measure bacteria levels in the human body.

   Bacteria live just about everywhere in the body. But despite
   their prevalence, scientists know very little about how these
   bacteria are related.

   Using a formula originally designed for geology, researchers at
   Duke are hoping to shed some light on the issue. A research
   team led by [17]Lawrence David, assistant professor in the Duke
   Center for Genomic and Computational Biology, developed a new
   method to accurately measure bacteria levels in the human
   body.


   Alex Washburne, a postdoctoral associate, explained that
   evolutionary biologists have long been working to construct the
   tree of life for larger species. But doing the
   same for microscopic species such as bacteria is a significant
   challenge. Justin Silverman, a M.D./Ph.D. student in David's
   lab, added that it would be impossible to individually count
   the trillions of bacteria in any one person.

   “When we look at the microbiome, we look at very complicated
   communities with thousands of species, and we know very little
   about what all of them are doing,” Washburne said.

   Instead, researchers have typically relied on sampling a small
   portion of bacteria and then extrapolating the total number of
   bacteria in the body based on the sample.

   Silverman likened the situation to trying to count the number
   of colored balls in a large ball pit. If a researcher picked up
   a handful of the balls in the pit, he or she could mark the
   colors of each ball in their hand. Then, the researcher could
   apply this information to figure out how many balls of each
   color are in the pit.

   However, this method comes with its flaws.

   “The problem with relative amounts is that it’s very hard to
   analyze data that only gives relative information,” Silverman
   said.

   He said that even simple things—like the subject eating a
   sandwich before data collection—can affect the data. Suppose
   that bacterial species A feeds on the digested nutrients from
   the sandwich, but species B and C cannot. The number of
   bacteria A in the body will increase while the number of
   bacteria B and C remain the same. However, Silverman said the
   traditional sampling method would actually lead to the
   conclusion that the number of B and C bacteria had decreased.

   To more accurately categorize and count the bacteria, Silverman
   adapted a mathematical tool typically used by geologists to
   study rock composition. A rock is made up of various minerals
   and substances, just as bacteria include a diverse array of
   species.

   “We’re finding that when we begin this marriage between biology
   and mathematics, there are new types of mathematical tools that
   are developed,” Washburne said.

   Washburne and Silverman both emphasized that the primary
   contribution of the paper was the mathematical tool itself.
   This formula may be used by evolutionary biologists in the
   future to evaluate their hypotheses about the relationship
   between different species.

   But the researchers also made a surprising discovery about two
   closely-related species of bacteria within the human mouth. The
   team found that different portions of the mouth actually housed
   different bacteria, contradicting what they had previously
   expected. Their findings suggest that bacteria species might
   have diverged to match different parts of the body.

   “What’s surprising is that you expect, if they’re closely
   related, then it’s just going to be this homogeneous mixture
   where you see a bunch of [bacteria] all over the mouth equally
   distributed,” Silverman said.

   This is just the latest piece of knowledge to come from an
   untapped wealth of information about the bacteria in the human
   body, the researchers said.

   “By and large, it’s a whole new world in there,” Washburne
   said. “It’s almost as if we found a new planet, and we just
   dived right into the rainforest.”

   The Chronicle is your source for Duke news, sports, culture and
   dialogue.

   Subscribe to the Chronicle: [18]Newsletter | [19]The Dirt |
   [20]Overtime
   (BUTTON) ×



