The complex role of gender in faculty hiring

   By [57]Viviane CallierApr. 15, 2016 , 10:00 AM


   Gender plays a complicated role in the hiring of computer
   science tenure-track faculty members, of which on average only
   about 15% are women, according to a study presented today at
   the peer-reviewed [58]International World Wide Web Conference
   in Montreal, Canada, and posted on the [59]arXiv preprint
   server in February. Gender bias in hiring is not blatant, the
   authors found, but gender-associated differences in
   productivity, postdoctoral experience, and institutional
   prestige of degree-granting institutions—which are likely due
   to bias against women during the training process—largely
   account for the observed gender imbalance in computer science
   faculty hiring networks.


   “This is evidence that gender doesn't stand by itself; it's
   baked into all these other processes,” says Brian Keegan, a
   research associate at the Harvard Business School who was not
   involved in the study.

   Despite significant attention to hiring more female faculty
   members in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics,
   they remain underrepresented at the top levels of academia. But
   faculty hiring is a complex and sometimes idiosyncratic
   process, and the specific underlying reasons for the continuing
   disparity are unclear. “One of the difficulties in this area
   [of gender and faculty hiring] is figuring out causality,” says
   senior author Aaron Clauset, a computer scientist at University
   of Colorado (CU), Boulder. “Gender, productivity, and
   postdoctoral training are all related to each other, so trying
   to tease out how important … a driving factor gender is is
   quite difficult.”

   To address this question, the authors used a hand-curated
   dataset of 2659 tenure-track computer science faculty members
   at 205 Ph.D.-granting departments across North America, which
   they had previously developed for a [60]2015 study of faculty
   hiring networks. The dataset included the years the faculty
   members were first hired as assistant professors, which ranged
   from 1970 to 2011; the prestige of the institutions where they
   got their degrees and were hired; whether they had postdoctoral
   experience; their publication history; and their gender. When
   the researchers created a model that took all these factors
   into account to predict the real-world hiring decisions, they
   found that institutional prestige and productivity alone were
   sufficient for accurate predictions. In other words, gender as
   a separate factor did not improve the model's accuracy. So, all
   other things being equal, gender did not seem to matter during
   the faculty hiring process.


   But the researchers are quick to point out that all other
   things are not equal. Women in computer science Ph.D. programs
   operate in cultures that often fail to be inclusive, so when
   they get to the faculty hiring process, they have already been
   disadvantaged in their training. Using “unbiased” measures like
   productivity and prestige can make it look like the decisions
   are gender-blind, but gender has in fact played a role all
   through the training process and is therefore already baked in.
   For example, the authors found that for the assistant
   professors who started their positions after 2002, women were
   less productive than men. “The origin of this productivity gap
   seems unlikely to be related to inherent differences in talent
   or effort,” the authors write, “and may instead be related to
   differential access to resources and mentoring, greater rates
   of hostile work environments or sexual harassment, differences
   in self-perceptions, or other gender-correlated factors.”

   This result offers a contrast to a [61]controversial paper
   published last year that found that based on one-page personal
   narratives or CVs with similar qualifications and either a
   typically male or female name, reviewers were twice as likely
   to choose to hire the woman. The authors of that study
   concluded that there was no longer any discrimination against
   women in the faculty hiring process, but others found this
   approach problematic. “It treats gender like it’s in a vacuum,
   like there is no baggage that goes along with being a woman or
   a man,” says Jane Stout, director of diversity research at the
   Computing Research Association in Washington, D.C. Perhaps
   women are not being discriminated against when reviewers
   consider resumes, “but what have women and men had to do
   differently to get to this specific situation right now [of
   being considered for a faculty job]?"


   The authors of the current study hoped to get around this
   objection by focusing on the outcome of the entire hiring
   process, not just a single step such as reviewing CVs. “If you
   are looking at different parts of a complex system, a
   system-level approach can be really beneficial in helping to
   put individual pieces together,” says study co-author Daniel
   Larremore, an applied mathematician at the Santa Fe institute.
   “We wanted to deconstruct [faculty hiring] … in terms of things
   we could measure, like publications, information about the
   prestige of the doctoral program, and so on.”

   However, one of the things that is missing from their model is
   the effect of the proportion of women who are already on the
   faculty at a given institution, Larremore adds. Departments
   that already have female faculty members are likely to have a
   climate that is friendlier to women, he explains, and therefore
   attract more women. In contrast, all-male departments might
   have a harder time recruiting women.

   The researchers also found that women and men were about
   equally likely to be hired at the most prestigious
   institutions, but fewer women than men were hired at less
   prestigious universities. The most prestigious ones tend to
   out-hire schools in the tier immediately below them because
   they have more hiring power, the researchers suggest. Due to
   the paucity of women with Ph.D.s in computer science—in 2011,
   just 20% of computer science Ph.D. recipients were
   female—efforts by the top-ranked departments to improve their
   gender ratios might come at the expense of institutions below
   them, explains lead author Samuel Way of CU Boulder. “In some
   ways, it's like a zero sum game, because there are so few women
   in computer science,” Clauset adds. “When the small number of
   women choose to go to one place, it means that other places
   don't get to hire them.”

   Overall, the gender breakdowns of computer science Ph.D.
   recipients and new faculty hires “are very close,” Clauset
   says, which “suggests there isn't much slack in the system for
   intervention at the faculty hiring stage. … If we want to
   increase the number of women in computing, the data suggest we
   should really focus on increasing the number of women who get
   Ph.D.s in computer science.”

   Finally, the authors forecasted when computer science might
   reach gender parity in faculty hiring at the assistant
   professor level: It’ll take approximately 60 years. “I think
   that’s really depressing,” Clauset says. “If we as a community
   are not happy with this rate, perhaps we as a community should
   get together and do something to change it. This is a
   conversation that I hope that can get started as a result of
   having real quantitative data.”
   Posted in:









   DOI: 10.1126/science.caredit.a1600061


