Alan Turing’s lost notebook

The Turing Guide

   [86]Buy Now



   Alan Turing’s personal mathematical notebook went on display a
   few days ago at Bletchley Park near London, the European
   headquarters of the Allied codebreaking operation in World War
   II. Until now, the notebook has been seen by few — not even
   scholars specializing in Turing’s work. It is on loan from its
   current owner, who acquired it in 2015 at a New York auction
   for [88]over one million dollars.


   The yellowing notebook — from Metcalfe and Son, just along the
   street from Turing’s rooms at King’s College in Cambridge —
   contains 39 pages in his handwriting. The auction catalogue
   (which inconsequentially inflated the page count) gave this
   description:

   “Hitherto unknown wartime manuscript of the utmost rarity,
   consisting of 56 pages of mathematical notes by Alan Turing,
   likely the only extensive holograph manuscript by him in
   existence.”

   A question uppermost in the minds of Turing fans will be
   whether the notebook gives new information about his famous
   code-cracking breakthroughs at Bletchley Park, or about the
   speech-enciphering device named “Delilah” that he invented
   later in the war at nearby Hanslope Park. The answer may
   disappoint. Although most probably written during the war, the
   notebook has no significant connection with Turing’s work for
   military intelligence. Nevertheless it makes fascinating
   reading: Turing titled it “Notes on Notations” and it consists
   of his commentaries on the symbolisms advocated by leading
   figures of twentieth century mathematics.
   Alan Turing's signature. Public domain via Wikimedia Commons.
   Alan Turing’s signature. Public domain via [89]Wikimedia
   Commons.


   My interest in the notebook was first piqued more than 20 years
   ago. This was during a visit to Turing’s friend Robin Gandy, an
   amiable and irreverent mathematical logician. In 1944-5 Gandy
   and Turing had worked in the same Nissen hut at Hanslope Park.
   Gandy remembered thinking Turing austere at first, but soon
   found him enchanting — he discovered that Turing liked parties
   and was a little vain about his clothes and appearance. As we
   sat chatting in his house in Oxford, Gandy mentioned that
   upstairs he had one of Turing’s notebooks. For a moment I
   thought he was going to show it to me, but he added
   mysteriously that it contained some private notes of his own.

   In his will Turing left all his mathematical papers to Gandy,
   who eventually passed them on to King’s College library — but
   not the notebook, which he kept with him up till his death in
   1995. Subsequently the notebook passed into unknown hands,
   until its reappearance in 2015. Gandy’s private notes turned
   out to be a dream diary. During the summer and autumn of 1956,
   two years after Turing’s death, he had filled 33 blank pages in
   the center of the notebook with his own handwriting. What he
   said there was indeed personal.

   Only a few years before Gandy wrote down these dreams and his
   autobiographical notes relating to them, Turing had been put on
   trial for being gay. Gandy began his concealed dream diary: “It
   seems a suitable disguise to write in between these notes of
   Alan’s on notation; but possibly a little sinister; a dead
   father figure and some of his thoughts which I most completely
   inherited.”
   Alan Turing, aged 16 by unknown. Public domain via Wikimedia
   Commons. Alan Turing, aged 16 by unknown. Public domain via
   [90]Wikimedia Commons.


   Mathematical reformer

   Turing’s own writings in the notebook are entirely
   mathematical, forming a critical commentary on the notational
   practices of a number of famous mathematicians, including
   Courant, Eisenhart, Hilbert, Peano, Titchmarsh, Weyl, and
   others. Notation is an important matter to mathematicians. As
   [91]Alfred North Whitehead — one of the founders of modern
   mathematical logic — said in his 1911 essay “The Symbolism of
   Mathematics”, a good notation “represents an analysis of the
   ideas of the subject and an almost pictorial representation of
   their relations to each other”. “By relieving the brain of all
   unnecessary work”, Whitehead remarked, “a good notation sets it
   free to concentrate on more advanced problems”. In a wartime
   typescript titled “The Reform of Mathematical Notation and
   Phraseology” [92]Turing said that an ill-considered notation
   was a “handicap” that could create “trouble”; it could even
   lead to “a most unfortunate psychological effect”, namely a
   tendency “to suspect the soundness of our [mathematical]
   arguments all the time”.


   This typescript, which according to Gandy was written at
   Hanslope Park in 1944 or 1945, provides a context for Turing’s
   notebook. In the typescript Turing proposed what he called a
   “programme” for “the reform of mathematical notation”. Based on
   mathematical logic, his programme would, he said, “help the
   mathematicians to improve their notations and phraseology,
   which are at present exceedingly unsystematic”. Turing’s
   programme called for “An extensive examination of current
   mathematical … books and papers with a view to listing all
   commonly used forms of notation”, together with an
   “[e]xamination of these notations to discover what they really
   mean”. His “Notes on Notations” formed part of this extensive
   investigation.

   Key to Turing’s proposed reforms was what mathematical
   logicians call the “theory of types”. This reflects the
   commonsensical idea that numbers and bananas, for example, are
   entities of different types: there are things which makes sense
   to say about a number — e.g. that it has a unique prime
   factorization — that cannot meaningfully be said of a banana.
   In emphasizing the importance of type theory for day-to-day
   mathematics, Turing was as usual ahead of his time. Today,
   virtually every computer programming language incorporates
   type-based distinctions.

   Link to the real Turing

   Turing never displayed much respect for status and — despite
   the eminence of the mathematicians whose notations he was
   discussing — his tone in “Notes on Notations” is far from
   deferential. “I don’t like this” he wrote at one point, and at
   another “this is too subtle and makes an inconvenient
   definition”. His criticisms bristle with phrases like “there is
   obscurity”, “rather abortive”, “ugly”, “confusing”, and
   “somewhat to be deplored”. There is nothing quite like this
   blunt candor to be found elsewhere in Turing’s writings; and
   with these phrases we perhaps get a sense of what it would have
   been like to sit in his Cambridge study listening to him. This
   scruffy notebook gives us the plain unvarnished Turing.

   Featured image credit: Enigma by Tomasz_Mikolajczyk. CC0 Public
   domain via [93]Pixabay.


   Jack Copeland, FRS, NZ, is Distinguished Professor in Arts at
   the University of Canterbury, New Zealand, where he is Director
   of the Turing Archive for the History of Computing. He has been
   script advisor and scientific consultant for a number of recent
   documentaries about Turing. Jack is Co-Director of the Turing
   Centre at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH),
   Zurich, and also Honorary Research Professor in the School of
   Historical and Philosophical Inquiry at the University of
   Queensland, Australia. In 2012 he was Royden B. Davis Visiting
   Chair of Interdisciplinary Studies in the Department of
   Psychology at Georgetown University, Washington DC, and in
   2015-16 was a Fellow at the Institute for Advanced Studies in
   Israel. A Londoner by birth, he earned a D.Phil. in
   mathematical logic from the University of Oxford, where he was
   taught by Turing's great friend Robin Gandy. Jack is also a
   co-author of [94]The Turing Guide.







   Subscribe to the OUPblog via email: _________________________
   Subscribe

   Or subscribe to articles in the subject area by [100]email or
   [101]RSS



