[23]Rewriting Life


How the Mathematics of Algebraic Topology Is Revolutionizing Brain
Science

Nobody understands the brain’s wiring diagram, but the tools of
algebraic topology are beginning to tease it apart.




   The human connectome is the network of links between different
   parts of the brain. These links are mapped out by the brain’s
   white matter—bundles of nerve cell projections called axons
   that connect the nerve cell bodies that make up gray matter.

   The conventional view of the brain is that the gray matter is
   primarily involved in information processing and cognition,
   while white matter transmits information between different
   parts of the brain. The structure of white matter—the
   connectome—is essentially the brain’s wiring diagram.

   This structure is poorly understood, but there are several
   high-profile projects to study it. This work shows that the
   connectome is much more complex than originally thought. The
   human brain contains some 10^10 neurons linked by
   10^14 synaptic connections. Mapping the way this link together
   is a tricky business, not least because the structure of the
   network depends on the resolution at which it is examined.

   This work is also uncovering evidence that the white matter
   plays a much more significant role than first thought in
   learning and coordinating the brain’s activity.  But exactly
   how this role is linked to the structure is not known.
   [neural-cycles.jpg?sw=600&amp;cx=72&amp;cy=0&amp;cw=848&amp;ch=
   354]

   So understanding this structure over vastly different scales is
   one of the great challenges of neuroscience; but one that is
   hindered by a lack of appropriate mathematical tools.

   Today, that looks set to change thanks to the mathematical
   field of algebraic topology, which neurologists are gradually
   coming to grips with for the first time. This discipline has
   traditionally been an arcane pursuit for classifying spaces and
   shapes.  Now Ann Sizemore at the University of Pennsylvania and
   a few pals show how it is beginning to revolutionize our
   understanding of the connectome.

   In pursuing their art, algebraic topologists set themselves the
   challenging goal of finding symmetries in topological spaces at
   different scales.

   In mathematics, a symmetry is anything that is invariant as the
   viewpoint changes. So the shape of a square persists unchanged
   as it rotates through 90 degrees—this is one type of symmetry.

   But some mathematical structures have symmetries that persist
   across scales. These are known as persistent homologies, and
   the search for them is turning out to be a key in understanding
   the connectome.

   Neurologists have long known that certain cognitive functions
   make use of various neural nodes that are distributed across
   the brain.  How these nodes are connected by white matter is
   one of the central questions for connectome projects.

   Neurologists study white matter fibers by looking at how water
   diffuses along their length. A technique known as diffusion
   spectrum imaging can then reveal the pathways for this
   diffusion and hence the structure of the white matter.

   To find out more, Sizemore and co measured the brains of eight
   healthy adults. This allowed them to look for the same
   structures in all of them. In particular, the team looked at
   the links between 83 different regions of the brain that are
   known to be involved in cognitive systems, such as the auditory
   system, the visual system, the somatosensory system involved in
   touch, pressure, pain, and so on.

   Having constructed a wiring diagram in this way, Sizemore and
   co applied the techniques of algebraic topology to study its
   structure. This threw up some important insights.

   To start with, it revealed that certain groups of nodes are
   “all-to-all connected”—in other words, each node in the group
   is connected to all the others, forming a structure called a
   clique. All the cognitive systems are made up of cliques of
   containing different numbers of nodes.

   But the analysis revealed another important group of
   topological structures as well. These are closed loops called
   cycles in which one node connects to another, which connects to
   another and then to another, and so on, until the cycle is
   completed when the final node connects to the first.

   This creates a neural circuit that can carry information around
   the brain and allow feedback loops to act, perhaps in the
   formation of memories and in controlling behavior. Sizemore and
   co say their analysis reveals a wide range of cycles of
   different sizes.

   While cliques tend to exist within specific parts of the brain,
   such as the cortex, cycles span different regions, linking
   wildly different regions with different functions. “These
   cycles link regions of early and late evolutionary origin in
   long loops, underscoring their unique role in controlling brain
   function,” say Sizemore and co.

   Another important difference between cliques and cycles is
   their density. Because cliques represent all-to-all connected
   nodes, they are dense structures. By contrast, loop-like cycles
   are relatively diffuse. Indeed, one way to characterize them is
   by the absence of links between the parts of the brain they
   encompass.

   In essence, cycles define cavities in the connectome across a
   wide range of scales. And the work of Sizemore and co shows
   that these cavities play a significant role. “These results
   offer a first demonstration that techniques from algebraic
   topology offer a novel perspective on structural connectomics,
   highlighting loop-like paths as crucial features in the human
   brain’s structural architecture,” say the team.

   That’s fascinating work revealing how algebraic topology is
   making an important contribution toward a better understanding
   of the connectome. Like all good science, this work raises as
   many questions as it answers. One suggestion is that cycles
   could allow a much broader repertoire of cognitive computations
   than is possible in other network architectures. But what kind
   of computations would these be?

   And the neural networks that AI systems depend on draw their
   inspiration from the structure of brain. Now that new
   structures are emerging through this kind of analysis, how will
   the AI community incorporate these discoveries and exploit
   algebraic topology is their work?

   This is clearly an exciting time to be an algebraic topologist.

   Ref: [25]arxiv.org/abs/1608.03520 : Closures and Cavities in
   the Human Connectome


   Become an MIT Technology Review Insider for in-depth analysis
   and unparalleled perspective.
   [26]Subscribe today
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)


   Emerging Technology from the arXiv

   [27]Emerging Technology from the arXiv Contributor


   Emerging Technology from the arXiv covers the latest ideas and
   technologies that appear on the Physics arXiv preprint server.
   It is part of the Physics arXiv Blog. Email:… [28]More
   [29]KentuckyFC@arxivblog.com
   [30]Subscribe to the Physics arXiv Blog RSS Feed.
   [31]READ COMMENTS

     [29] mailto:KentuckyFC@arxivblog.com

   Please read our [32]commenting guidelines.
   Please enable JavaScript to view the [33]comments powered by
   Disqus.


   Subscribe to Continue Reading


