Most Popular

    1. [50]The Myth of the Kindly General Lee


    2. [52]What Trump Doesn't Understand About Gun Control in
       Great Britain


    3. [54]My Family’s Slave


    4. [56]The Panic President


    5. [58]What ISIS Really Wants









           mailto:?subject=The Movies Already Getting Oscar Buzz&body=The films touted for consideration this year include prestige projects like Martin Scorsese’s Silence and festival hits like Barry Jenkins’s Moonlight.

       Text Size


   With the main film festivals of the fall (Telluride, Venice,
   and Toronto) now concluded, and Martin Scorsese [67]finally
   confirming that his much-anticipated drama Silence will come
   out at the end of the year, the next three months will bring a
   calendar loaded with prestige releases. Among them are films
   that better reflect the wide range of faces and voices in
   America (and around the world), which have recently been
   severely[68] under-represented on Oscar night. Audiences and
   critics will be paying especially close attention to the works
   and actors the Academy chooses to recognize, after the awards
   were condemned this year for nominating only white performers
   two years in a row.


   The question, as always, is which films will be able to stand
   out once studios begin their awards campaigns in earnest. A lot
   can happen in a few months; after all, the season has already
   seen its earliest anointed front-runner practically disappear
   from the race. The former Best Picture favorite was the big
   story out of Sundance: [69]The Birth of a Nation (October 7), a
   searing depiction of Nat Turner’s 1831 slave rebellion in
   Virginia written and directed by Nate Parker. The film won the
   festival’s Grand Jury Prize just as the conversation over the
   largely white Oscar nominations was at its loudest. The movie
   was acquired by Fox Searchlight for a [70]record $17.5 million,
   with the studio promising a huge publicity campaign in the fall
   to help push it for awards contention.
   The Birth of a Nation / Fox Searchlight


   Though every Oscar race has early contenders that later fall by
   the wayside, the story with The Birth of a Nation is much more
   complex. While the film is coming out less than two weeks from
   now, it’s been completely overshadowed by reporting into
   [71]rape charges that a college student filed against Parker
   and his writing partner 17 years ago, and the subsequent
   revelation that the accuser killed herself years after Parker
   was cleared. Though the [72]intricate details of the case don’t
   lend themselves to quick summary, they reflect very poorly on
   Parker, as did his immediate reaction to the renewed media
   coverage. Though it seems crass to analyze the case’s impact on
   the film’s awards chances, it’s still an unavoidably terrible
   PR situation for The Birth of a Nation—and Oscar races tend to
   be rooted in publicity as much as they are in critical acclaim.


   Beyond the Sundance praise, however, The Birth of a Nation
   seemed poised for success because of its weighty historical
   subject matter, and its presentation was frequently compared to
   another Oscar winner, Mel Gibson’s Braveheart. The field beyond
   The Birth of a Nation is nonetheless rich and different;
   despite the absence of an obvious blockbuster, there’s a swath
   of films that seem certain to inspire passionate support and
   (hopefully) provide a nominee list that isn’t just comprised of
   familiar faces.
   La La Land / Summit Entertainment

   First, there are the festival hits, films that have peaked in
   recent weeks after successful premieres at Telluride, Venice,
   or Toronto. Perhaps the most hyped is [73]La La Land (December
   2), which won the pivotal People’s Choice Award at Toronto, a
   common bellwether for the Oscars that in recent years has gone
   to winners including Room, The Imitation Game, 12 Years a
   Slave, and Silver Linings Playbook. Directed by Damien Chazelle
   (Whiplash), the swoony LA-set musical (with original music and
   lyrics from the Broadway duo [74]Pasek and Paul) has drawn
   raves for its lead performers Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone.
   Moonlight / A24


   Telluride saw the debut of [75]Moonlight (October 21), the
   second film from the independent director Barry Jenkins, who
   made a small splash in 2008 with his debut Medicine for
   Melancholy. A powerful coming-of-age story about a young black
   man, Moonlight is best seen with as little preparation as
   possible; it’s a film that’s difficult to capture in a few
   words, or in a single moment. For that reason, it might seem
   like a more difficult play for Oscar voters—but in a year when
   Hollywood’s representation is under so much scrutiny, and with
   critics firmly declaring it one of the must-see movies of the
   year, it could be a surprise hit.
   Hidden Figures / Fox


   Moonlight is a beautiful, singular film, but it shouldn’t have
   to solely carry the burden of easing the Academy’s
   embarrassment after its last two years of all-white acting
   nominees. There are many other exciting projects due starring
   ensembles of color, like [76]Fences (December 16), an
   adaptation of August Wilson’s Pulitzer-Prize winning play,
   which has Denzel Washington directing and starring alongside
   Viola Davis; [77]Hidden Figures (December 25), a biopic about
   the African American NASA mathematician Katherine Johnson
   (Taraji P. Henson), who calculated the trajectories for the
   Apollo 11 flight; and [78]Loving (November 4), which stars Joel
   Edgerton and Ruth Negga as the couple who named the Supreme
   Court case that made interracial marriage legal in America in
   1967.
   Jackie / Fox Searchlight


   Most of these films seem primed to appeal to voters, who love
   prestige projects from A-list actors and directors, adaptations
   of beloved works, and worthy biographical films that address
   the nation’s past. Other movies along those lines: the Sundance
   hit drama [79]Manchester by the Sea (November 18), Ang Lee’s
   [80]Billy Lynn’s Long Halftime Walk (November 11), an unusual
   Iraq War film based on a novel by Ben Fountain; [81]Live by
   Night (December), a Ben Affleck-directed 1920s crime film
   inspired by a Dennis Lehane book; Jackie (December 9), which
   focuses on Jacqueline Kennedy (Natalie Portman ) in the days
   after her husband’s assassination; and [82]Lion (November 25),
   an inspiring tale starring Dev Patel based on the nonfiction
   hit A Long Way Home by Saroo Brierley.
   Silence / Paramount Pictures


   One of the longest-gestating adaptations is Scorsese’s Silence
   (December 23), a film he’s been trying to make since the early
   1990s. Based on Shusaku Endo’s 1966 novel, the film explores a
   fascinatingly ambiguous period of 17th-century Japan, in which
   Portuguese missionaries spreading Christianity in the country
   were persecuted by the ruling shogunate. A stirring work about
   belief in the face of unimaginable suffering, it’s well-suited
   to its director, who has long struggled with his own Catholic
   faith, and could garner buzz for its stars Andrew Garfield,
   Liam Neeson, and Adam Driver. 2016 is certainly filled with
   movies in search of a wider audience, but Scorsese’s ultimate
   passion project could end up the one that stands out the most.





