How effective is math education in Canada?

Featured / August 24, 2016

   Written by [25]Joseph Keller
   Comments ()


   Canadian organisation WISEMath is critical of the way math is
   taught in our schools

   [26]Feature 2 - Nicole Kwit


   (Nicole Kwit)

   According to a movement of parents and educators around the
   country, the way math has commonly been taught in Canada in
   recent years is fundamentally flawed.

   “We have concerns about the math curriculum across western
   Canada,” says Anna Stokke, professor at University of Winnipeg
   and one of the founders of WISEMath. “Basically, the curriculum
   deteriorated quite a lot over the past several years.”

   WISEMath—short for Western Initiative for Strengthening
   Mathematics—is an initiative founded by several Manitoba
   academics in 2011 with a goal of improving education from
   kindergarten to grade twelve in Western Canada. WISEMath
   advocates for an overhaul of the math curriculums in favor of a
   greater emphasis on fundamental skills that, according to
   Stokke, are in many cases being neglected.

   In recent years, math curriculums in Western Canada have often
   taken a “creative education” approach. The idea behind this
   approach is that kids are better at learning when they are
   allowed to work out their own method for solving a given
   problem. Following this logic, a greater emphasis on open-ended
   questions with multiple strategies for solutions is given, with
   less focus lent to overall content knowledge. This approach
   became common in the United States in the early 90s and was
   gradually adopted by Canadian provinces in the late 90s.
   Creative education has been a fixture in Canada ever since.

   “Instead of giving a student two numbers to add you might ask
   them to make up their own problem. [Creative education is] that
   sort of thing, or asking students to come up with their own
   method for adding or division.”

   The problem with this approach to teaching, according to
   WISEMath, is that it doesn’t provide a strong foundation in
   some of the more fundamental skills. They argue that many of
   the most basic skills—addition, subtraction, multiplication,
   etc—are simply not up to interpretation. Some important
   concepts are particularly neglected and often left out
   altogether, such as learning to add and subtract in columns and
   long division. WISEMath points to declining math test scores
   nationwide as evidence that this approach to learning is not
   working.

   “The problem with this type of thing is you’re talking about
   novice learners. They’ve never done this before and it just
   doesn’t work,” says Stokke. “So what you end up with are kids
   without basic skills, and if you don’t have basic skills, you
   can’t solve more difficult problems.”

   “Math is like a ladder,” Stokke continues. “It’s really
   cumulative, so if someone takes you to the the middle rung of
   the ladder and you haven’t learned the steps before, it’s
   impossible to succeed. And that’s what being missed.”

   WISEMath calls for a culture change in Canadian school systems
   to emphasize certain core concepts earlier. Some progress has
   already been made on this front, such as the return of a focus
   on multiplication tables in early grades. Other concepts such
   as fraction arithmetic—currently covered in grades seven to
   eight—need to be covered earlier, according to WISEMath.

   “It’s really important. In fact, it’s predictive of how well a
   student is going to do in algebra or later math in highschool,
   how well they can actually do fractions, addition, and
   subtraction by grades four and five,” says Stokke.

   WISEMath is also concerned about the level of mathematical
   knowledge of many Canadian teachers, calling for teachers to be
   required to have a mathematical expertise that extends beyond
   what they are required to teach. This would require a
   mathematical background that many Canadian teachers currently
   do not have. Recognizing this fact, WISEMath advocates for
   elementary schools to have dedicated math specialists as part
   of the faculty to come into each class for math education
   rather than leaving it up to generalized classroom teachers.
   This would be similar to how French is currently taught. Stokke
   admits that WISEMath has made little headway on this front,
   possibly because school boards are reluctant to go forward with
   such a radical and potentially expensive change.

   “I don’t see that happening any time soon, although I think it
   would be a wonderful thing to have,” says Stokke.

   WISEMath advises parents who are concerned about the quality of
   their kids’ math education to work with their children
   personally on basic foundational skills such as multiplication
   tables and fractions early on.

   “Usually I say to parents, ‘Teach your kids traditional methods
   for arithmetic. That’s the best thing you can do.’ They may not
   be learning the things that you did when you were in school, so
   just teach it to them,” says Stokke.

   The Ministry of Education for BC did not agree to an interview.
   (Visited 452 times, 1 visits today)


