Segment Transcript

   IRA FLATOW: This is Science Friday. I’m Ira Flatow.

   [CLASSICAL MUSIC PLAYING]

   Ah, the sweet sound of the string quartet. Violin, viola,
   cello, and bass, working together in perfect musical harmony.
   At least that’s what I hear.

   When Carleen Hutchins listened to a string quartet, she heard
   room for improvement. Hutchins was a luthier, a maker of
   violins, and not just any luthier. Over half a century, this
   former school teacher– science teacher– up-ended the world of
   violin making by bringing science to the woodworking table.

   In her basement lab, she took apart her creations, running
   hundreds of experiments to figure out what makes a violin sing.
   And she even one-upped the string quartet. She created her own
   violin octet, tackling problems with the original violin family
   that had plagued violin makers for centuries. We’ll hear a
   little of that octet later.

   Quincy Whitney tells Carleen’s story in her new biography. It’s
   called American Luthier: The Art and Science of the Violin. She
   joins me from Boston to talk about it. Welcome to Science
   Friday.

   QUINCY WHITNEY: Thank you very much, Ira. I’m honored to be
   here.

   IRA FLATOW: Well, thank you.

   Let’s start at the beginning. I mean, how does this grade
   school science teacher get hooked on violin making?

   QUINCY WHITNEY: It’s actually a whim and a dare, and then also
   a creative outlet. It’s a whim because she used to whittle. She
   started whittling when she was a tomboy about age six. And she
   had this $75 viola in her hands and just kept thinking maybe
   she could make it better.

   It was a dare because her best friend, Helen Rice, just said it
   was an impossible task, and why would she try to do that. And
   it took her two years to make one.

   And it was a creative outlet because she’d just left her job.
   She just became a new mom at a rather late age of 36, and I
   think she needed an outlet badly. And it became carving the
   plates of her first viola.

   IRA FLATOW: How did she decide that the standard, you know,
   quartet, string quartet, is not good enough?

   QUINCY WHITNEY: It’s not that she decided that, it’s that after
   she had been studying acoustics with retired Harvard physicist
   Frederick Saunders and doing experiments, and after she had
   also been making about 35 violins with a German violin maker,
   learning that craft, she got a knock on her door one day at 112
   Essex Avenue in Montclair, New Jersey, and it was composer
   Henry Brandt from Vermont who had read some articles about this
   New Jersey housewife violin maker who was making a little bit
   of news. And he sort of confronted her with the question. He
   said, you know, medieval instruments, we have families of
   instruments in the Renaissance that are recorders, we have
   families of viols, but we’ve never really had a family of
   violins. And what do you think? Do you think you could make
   one?

   So with the question, she sort of decided she would try it. And
   it took her the next decade–

   IRA FLATOW: Wow.

   QUINCY WHITNEY: –to do that.

   IRA FLATOW: So she creates a whole new family of violins?

   QUINCY WHITNEY: Yeah. It’s really based on the fact that the
   string quartet has been considered a bit of a sacred cow for
   many centuries, and everybody thinks it’s perfect. But
   actually, tonally, it lacks. It lacks a true tenor voice, and
   also a true alto voice.

   In fact in 16– I think was 1690, Stradivari actually got an
   order for two alto violins that were going to be played as a
   contralto and a tenor. So if you look at the string quartet
   today, sometimes the second violin will play an alto part, or
   the viola will play a tenor part, but there are alto and tenor
   gaps in the middle of the string quartet. And that really
   became the sort of focus for these eight violins across the
   range of a piano.

   IRA FLATOW: Huh. I always thought that where the violins leave
   off, then the viola picks up there. And the viola leaves off,
   the cello picks up. You’re saying there are gaps instead?

   QUINCY WHITNEY: If you look at a family of recorders or a
   family of viols, it’s like the range of the human voice. You
   have– and that’s exactly what these eight instruments are.
   They’re across the range of the human voice.

   So it starts with a treble and then a soprano and a mezzo, an
   alto, a tenor, a baritone, a bass, and a contrabass. So in that
   way, you see how complete the range is with eight instruments
   because it’s across the range of the piano.

   IRA FLATOW: Hm. So she created a piano for the violin,
   basically?

   QUINCY WHITNEY: Basically. A range, yeah. A tonal range that
   would fill in the gaps. And also they were tonally matched so
   that the violins– each one sounds– has the same dynamics. The
   treble, the tiny 11-inch treble, can compete with the
   contrabass in terms of dynamics and pizzicato. And that’s sort
   of revolutionary, too.

   IRA FLATOW: OK, now let’s talk about her as an experimenter.
   She’s an engineer, and she doesn’t just– well, she starts her
   work by saying, you know, I have to take these things apart to
   understand how they work, right? And that doesn’t go over so
   well with some of the violinists.

   QUINCY WHITNEY: Yeah. Actually, she starts by suggesting that
   science could make a better fiddle. And that upsets the violin
   world, because, of course, they’re copying Stradivari for three
   centuries now thinking that he perfected the craft.

   But she’s suggesting, first of all, that it was OK to apply
   science to the woodworking shop for the violin maker. And the
   violin maker was giving her a hard time about the fact that she
   might be demystifying the art. And she used to laugh at that
   because she said, of course, you can’t separate acoustics from
   music.

   Music is a science, and sometimes we forget that. We
   marginalize it as art only. But we can’t separate acoustics
   from music.

   IRA FLATOW: Interesting. So she creates what’s called the Swiss
   cheese violin. What was that?

   QUINCY WHITNEY: One of her most dramatic experiments with
   Saunders– I think it might have been after Saunders– was a
   Swiss cheese violin where she punched 64 holes in the ribs of a
   violin and then plugged each full hole with cotton. And then as
   she and Saunders were playing that instrument, they would pull
   cotton out and see what happened to the sound.

   She always said that we did the right thing for the wrong
   reason, because they thought originally that they were studying
   the wood modes. And then they realized that maybe the more
   important thing to study were the air currents inside the box.
   And there might be hundreds of air currents, and Carleen spent
   50 years studying basically two, the relationship between two
   different ones.

   IRA FLATOW: Because we always hear, oh, Stradivari was the
   great because he had the right wood and the right pattern. And
   you’re saying she discovered it was the air that was really–

   QUINCY WHITNEY: Yeah, that actually we could look at the violin
   as a wind instrument.

   The other thing people forget is that Stradivari was, in fact,
   a contemporary maker. He wasn’t copying anybody. He was making
   instruments. So in his time, you could buy a contemporary
   instrument from Stradivari.

   And what’s happened hence is that three centuries, violin
   makers have thought they had to just copy Amati, Guameri, and
   Stradivari. And she was suggesting that just maybe we could go
   further than that.

   IRA FLATOW: So she does some more research. She does some
   experiments with Christmas glitter. Tell us about it.

   QUINCY WHITNEY: Yeah, Ernst Chladni was the German physicist
   who started sort of showing the footprints of sound by taking
   plates– this is, like, the 1780s, he published a whole paper on
   it– where you could take sand grains and put it on a plate and
   then vibrate the plate at different frequencies and different
   geometric patterns would form.

   The parts of the plate that’s vibrating, the sand falls away
   from to the nodes where they plate is not vibrating. So it
   becomes these beautiful geometric patterns at different
   frequencies, and Carleen decided to try to apply that to a free
   violin plate, which is a top or back plate that’s not connected
   to the ribs.

   And then when she saw these different patterns, she started to
   use it as a guide where she had to keep carving the plate. The
   luthier’s always looking for that ratio between stiffness and
   flexibility, which has to do with carving that place in a
   meticulous way. And Stradivari, Amati, she was always saying
   that the old Italian masters had learned to do it intuitively
   by touching and tapping, and that this was merely a guide to
   help modern luthiers do it more consistently.

   IRA FLATOW: So when you say she got certain tones in the plate
   from putting the glitter on it and when she discovered from
   people who knew music that, ha, that’s the right tone, she knew
   how to then make the next piece of wood do exactly the same
   thing by–

   QUINCY WHITNEY: It wasn’t quite that simple. It was hundreds of
   hours of trial and error.

   IRA FLATOW: Wow.

   QUINCY WHITNEY: She would carve a plate and then she would put
   the whole instrument together and give to a player and get a
   reaction and see what the player thought. And then she’d go
   back to the drawing board, take it apart, recarve it, test it
   again with the Christmas glitter, and then all over again.
   Hundreds and hundreds of hours of cut and try.

   IRA FLATOW: Wow. So just to pay tribute to her and talk more
   about it, let’s listen to her– Carleen Hutchins’s new violin
   family. This is a group called The Hutchins Consort playing a
   tune you might recognize.

   [MUSIC – HUTCHINS CONSORT, “SUMMERTIME”]

   Wow. Wow. Of course that’s Gershwin’s “Summertime.” Quincy, how
   would you describe this octet sound?

   QUINCY WHITNEY: It’s like something you’ve never heard before.
   It’s a new palette of sound in string instruments. It’s
   revolutionary.

   I listened particularly to that piece about 11 times when the
   Hutchins Consort was on an East Coast tour in 2011. They’re
   amazing group. They play everything from Medieval and
   Renaissance to jazz and modern. They do about 40 concerts a
   year, and on the West Coast. And I’m really hoping that they
   can come back for an East Coast tour now that the book is out
   because they’ve been waiting for the book because the book has
   a chapter on them and tells their story.

   IRA FLATOW: Hm. So how do you describe the sound differently
   from if it were just a regular string quartet?

   QUINCY WHITNEY: The balance is amazing. And the fact that the
   dynamics are amazing also. The treble can talk back to the
   contrabass. The pizzicato is phenomenal. The pizzicato was, of
   course, the plucked string, and that’s where you really hear
   the dynamics of an instrument.

   You hear how– lots of times in an orchestra, if you look at the
   reconfiguration of the orchestra, we have 30 violins to one or
   two brass instruments. And I’ve had a cellist who plays her
   baritone, Akua Dixon, say that she could finally play a duo
   with her maybe former spouse, I’m not sure, who is a wind
   player. So one string instrument could play with a wind
   instrument in an equal way because those dynamics and
   resonances are more powerful now with the research of Carleen
   Hutchins.

   IRA FLATOW: Is it easy to find someone who’s playing the octet?
   Or a group of people? If you want to–

   QUINCY WHITNEY: They’re very unusual.

   IRA FLATOW: Yeah?

   QUINCY WHITNEY: She made seven octets, and four of them are in
   museums, unfortunately, not being played, although one in
   Edinburgh can actually be loaned to players. But the only
   ensemble currently is the Hutchins Consort in San Diego,
   California.

   But there are about seven luthiers now, seven to 10, who are
   students of Hutchins. And if someone ordered one octet
   tomorrow, an alto, a baritone, any of them, they could make
   them. In fact, there are luthiers who have them now, who’ve
   made them.

   IRA FLATOW: What would it cost to make one?

   QUINCY WHITNEY: I think the going price would be anywhere from
   five to 10, I’m not sure. $5,000 to $10,000. It just depends on
   where that is in the luthier’s repertoire at this point.

   IRA FLATOW: All right, we’re talking to Quincy Whitney telling
   the story of The American Luthier: The Art and Science of the
   Violin– great new book– on Science Friday from PRI, Public
   Radio International.

   But you couldn’t really– is there any place to actually put an
   order in for one? Or could a group get started if they wanted
   to with a group of them?

   QUINCY WHITNEY: Actually, that’s a great question, and it’s
   something I should answer on my website. That’s one thing I
   have not answered. If someone would like to order one, I can
   certainly list those luthiers on my own website that would be
   able to produce one.

   Some of them have already have them in their repertoire. They
   already have them in their shop. And there’s one particular one
   in– there’s a maker out in New Mexico who has really focused on
   the vertical viola big time and thought it was that whole
   solution, you know, for violists if they would be willing to
   play something vertically. And that’s not happened as greatly
   as a she would like, but there are luthiers that make these
   instruments.

   IRA FLATOW: You knew Carleen for 12 years. What kind of person
   was she?

   QUINCY WHITNEY: She was conflicted a little bit, and
   contradictory. She would always talk fiddles with anyone who
   walked in the door. She was a generous spirit in terms of a
   teacher. But she was very private with respect to her personal
   life and her personal expression. But she was a very generous,
   passionate kind of person who sort of got taken away by her
   passion.

   She was a mother of two, but I think she found it difficult
   sometimes to put the pieces of her passion together with
   parenting. She was very lucky to have a modern spouse who
   basically raised the children because she was taken away so
   much with her fiddles. But a very– a kind person and
   generous-spirited and very determined. She was a taskmaster
   when it came to being a teacher, too.

   IRA FLATOW: How did you bump into her?

   QUINCY WHITNEY: I was a Boston Globe Arts Reporter for the New
   Hampshire Weekly section of the Sunday Globe for 14 years. And
   someone said to me at a New Hampshire Humanities Council
   meeting that if I covered the arts, I ought to go meet this
   violin maker who lives up on Lake Winnipesaukee in New
   Hampshire. So I did.

   I called her up, and I said, this is Quincy Whitney with The
   Boston Globe and I’d like to do a story on you. And she said,
   no. I don’t have time. And I thought, this is an 87-year-old
   woman who doesn’t need me, and I was very intrigued.

   So I hung in the phone thinking what else could I say. And she
   said, what’s your angle? And the first thing that came to mind
   was the truth. I said, I’m interested in the stories where
   science and art overlap. And she said, well, that’s exactly
   what I do. When do we talk?

   IRA FLATOW: Wow. And how much more difficult, is it more
   difficult, for regular string musicians to play the octet?

   QUINCY WHITNEY: There is definitely a learning curve. And the
   Hutchins Consort players can particularly address that. And
   depending on the instrument, which of the eight you’re playing,
   there are more or less adjustments.

   The real conundrum at the center of the octet is the alto,
   which is a vertical viola. So, of course, the joke is that
   violists have to, in some sense, be trained as a cellist. But
   that’s also just a conundrum.

   There’s also three other instrument– two other instruments, the
   baritone and the tenor, that are opportunities for cellists. So
   it just depends on which instrument you’re playing. There’s a
   Russian virtuoso on the treble, Gregory [INAUDIBLE], who is a
   St. Petersburg Philharmonic player, and to listen to this man
   on the treble is an amazing, controversial, and revolutionary
   experience because you can’t believe his fingers can overlap
   the way they do on the strings and cover such a tiny
   instrument.

   IRA FLATOW: So it’s like having a cell phone trying to play an
   instrument.

   QUINCY WHITNEY: Yes.

   IRA FLATOW: The keyboard’s so tiny.

   QUINCY WHITNEY: Yes.

   IRA FLATOW: The strings are so small–

   QUINCY WHITNEY: Yes.

   IRA FLATOW: –and close together.

   QUINCY WHITNEY: But Gregory’s an amazing virtuoso on it.

   IRA FLATOW: Yeah, well, I guess there are albums out there
   somewhere that we can listen to him.

   QUINCY WHITNEY: I would suggest everyone should go to my
   website, which is quincywhitney.com, but also the
   hutchinsconsort.org, for further information about their
   recordings.

   IRA FLATOW: Well, thank you very much, Quincy, for taking time
   to talk about this great book.

   QUINCY WHITNEY: Ira, thank you.

   IRA FLATOW: Quincy Whitney is the author of American Luthier:
   The Art and Science of the Violin. And if you want to listen a
   little bit, we ask you to go to our website at
   sciencefriday.com/violin and you can hear some of the Hutchins
   violin octet on our website.

   Copyright © 2016 Science Friday Initiative. All rights
   reserved. Science Friday transcripts are produced on a tight
   deadline by 3Play Media. Fidelity to the original
   aired/published audio or video file might vary, and text might
   be updated or amended in the future. For the authoritative
   record of ScienceFriday’s programming, please visit the
   original aired/published recording. For terms of use and more
   information, visit our policies pages at



