The perils of “Growth Mindset” education: Why we’re trying to fix our
kids when we should be fixing the system

How a promising but oversimplified idea caught fire, then got coopted
by conservative ideology

   [67]Alfie Kohn [68]Skip to Comments


   Topics: [69]Childhood, [70]Education, [71]Pedagogy,
   [72]Psychology, [73]Politics News, [74]News
   [75]The perils of "Growth Mindset" education: Why we're trying
   to fix our kids when we should be fixing the system (Credit:
   AP/Jose F. Moreno)


   One of the most popular ideas in education these days can be
   summarized in a single sentence (a fact that may help to
   account for its popularity).

   Here’s the sentence:

   Kids tend to fare better when they regard intelligence and
   other abilities not as fixed traits that they either have or
   lack, but as attributes that can be improved through effort.

   In a series of monographs over many years and in a book
   published in 2000, psychologist Carol Dweck used the label
   “incremental theory” to describe the self-fulfilling belief
   that one can become smarter. Rebranding it more catchily as the
   “growth mindset” allowed her to recycle the idea a few years
   later in a best-selling book for general readers.

   By now, the growth mindset has approached the status of a
   cultural meme. The premise is repeated with uncritical
   enthusiasm by educators and a growing number of parents,
   managers, and journalists — to the point that one half expects
   supporters to start referring to their smartphones as
   “effortphones.” But, like the buzz over the related concept
   known as “grit” (a form of self-discipline involving long-term
   persistence), there’s something disconcerting about how the
   idea has been used — and about the broader assumption that what
   students most need is a “mindset” adjustment.

   Unlike grit — which, as I’ve argued [76]elsewhere, is driven
   more by conservative ideology than by solid research — Dweck’s
   basic thesis is supported by decades’ worth of good data. It’s
   not just the habit of attributing your failure to being stupid
   that holds you back, but also the habit of attributing your
   success to being smart. Regardless of their track record, kids
   tend to do better in the future if they believe that how well
   they did in the past was primarily a result of effort.


   But “how well they did” at what?

   The problem with sweeping, generic claims about the power of
   attitudes or beliefs isn’t just a risk of overstating the
   benefits but also a tendency to divert attention from the
   nature of the tasks themselves: How valuable are they, and who
   gets to decide whether they must be done? Dweck is a research
   psychologist, not an educator, so her inattention to the
   particulars of classroom assignments is understandable.
   Unfortunately, even some people who are educators would rather
   convince students they need to adopt a more positive attitude
   than address the quality of the curriculum (what the students
   are being taught) or the pedagogy (how they’re being taught
   it).

   An awful lot of schooling still consists of making kids cram
   forgettable facts into short-term memory. And the kids
   themselves are seldom consulted about what they’re doing, even
   though genuine excitement about (and proficiency at) learning
   rises when they’re brought into the process, invited to search
   for answers to their own questions and to engage in extended
   projects. Outstanding classrooms and schools — with a rich
   documentary record of their successes — show that the quality
   of education itself can be improved. But books, articles, TED
   talks, and teacher-training sessions devoted to the wonders of
   adopting a growth mindset rarely bother to ask whether the
   curriculum is meaningful, whether the pedagogy is thoughtful,
   or whether the assessment of students’ learning is authentic
   (as opposed to defining success merely as higher scores on
   dreadful standardized tests).

   Small wonder that this idea goes down so easily. All we have to
   do is get kids to adopt the right attitude, to think
   optimistically about their ability to handle whatever they’ve
   been given to do. Even if, quite frankly, it’s not worth doing.


   The most common bit of concrete advice offered by Dweck and
   others enamored of the growth mindset is to praise kids for
   their effort (“You tried really hard”) rather than for their
   ability (“You’re really smart”) in order to get them to
   persevere. (Google the words “praise” and “effort” together:
   more than 70 million hits.) But the first problem with this
   seductively simple script change is that praising children for
   their effort carries problems of its own, as several studies
   have confirmed: It can communicate that they’re really not very
   capable and therefore unlikely to succeed at future tasks. (“If
   you’re complimenting me just for trying hard, I must really be
   a loser.”)

   The more serious concern, however, is that what’s really
   problematic is praise itself. It’s a verbal reward, an
   extrinsic inducement, and, like other rewards, is often
   construed by the recipient as manipulation. A substantial
   research literature has shown that the kids typically end up
   less interested in whatever they were rewarded or praised for
   doing, because now their goal is just to get the reward or
   praise. As I’ve explained in [77]books and [78]articles, the
   most salient feature of a positive judgment is not that it’s
   positive but that it’s a judgment; it’s more about controlling
   than encouraging. Moreover, praise communicates that our
   acceptance of a child comes with strings attached: Our approval
   is conditional on the child’s continuing to impress us or do
   what we say. What kids actually need from us, along with
   nonjudgmental feedback and guidance, is unconditional support —
   the antithesis of a patronizing pat on the head for having
   jumped through our hoops.


   The solution, therefore, goes well beyond a focus on what’s
   being praised — that is, merely switching from commending
   ability to commending effort. Praise for the latter is likely
   to be experienced as every bit as controlling and conditional
   as praise for the former. Tellingly, the series of Dweck’s
   studies on which she still relies to support the idea of
   praising effort, which she conducted with Claudia Mueller in
   the 1990s, included no condition in which students received
   nonevaluative feedback. Other researchers have found that just
   such a response — information about how they’ve done without a
   judgment attached — is preferable to any sort of praise.

   Thus, the challenge for a teacher, parent, or manager is to
   consider a moratorium on offering verbal doggie biscuits,
   period. We need to attend to deeper differences: between
   extrinsic and intrinsic motivation, and between “doing to” and
   “working with” strategies. Unfortunately, we’re discouraged
   from thinking about these more meaningful distinctions — and
   from questioning the whole carrot-and-stick model (of which
   praise is an example) — when we’re assured that it’s sufficient
   just to offer a different kind of carrot.


   Here’s another part of the bigger picture that’s eclipsed when
   we get too caught up in the “growth vs. fixed” (or “incremental
   vs. entity”) dichotomy: If students are preoccupied with how
   well they’re doing in school, then their interest in what
   they’re doing may suffer. A [79]2010 study found that when
   students whose self-worth hinges on their performance face the
   prospect of failure, it doesn’t help for them to adopt a growth
   mindset. In fact, those who did so were even more likely to
   give themselves an excuse for screwing up — a strategy known as
   “self-handicapping” — as compared to those with the dreaded
   fixed mindset.


   Even when a growth mindset doesn’t make things worse, it can
   help only so much if students have been led — by things like
   grades, tests, and, worst of all, competition — to become more
   focused on achievement than on the learning itself. Training
   them to think about effort more than ability does nothing to
   address the fact, confirmed by several educational
   psychologists, that too much emphasis on performance undermines
   intellectual engagement. Just as with praise, betting
   everything on a shift from ability to effort may miss what
   matters most.

   And this brings us to the biggest blind spot of all — the whole
   idea of focusing on the mindsets of individuals. Dweck’s work
   nestles comfortably in a long self-help tradition, the American
   can-do, just-adopt-a-positive-attitude spirit.(“I think I can,
   I think I can…”) The message of that tradition has always been
   to adjust yourself to conditions as you find them because those
   conditions are immutable; all you can do is decide on the
   spirit in which to approach them. Ironically, the more we
   occupy ourselves with getting kids to attribute outcomes to
   their own effort, the more we communicate that the conditions
   they face are, well, fixed.

   Social psychologists use the term “fundamental attribution
   error” to mean paying so much attention to personality and
   attitudes that we overlook how profoundly the social
   environment affects what we do and who we are.  Their point is
   that it’s simply inaccurate to make too much of a fuss about
   things like mindsets, but there are also political implications
   to doing so.

   Why, for example, do relatively few young women choose to study
   or work in the fields of math and science? Is it because of
   entrenched sexism and [80]“the way the science career structure
   works”?  Well, to someone sold on Dweck’s formula, the answer
   is no: It’s [81]“all a matter of mindset.” We need only “shift
   widespread perceptions over to the ‘growth mindset’” — that is,
   to the perceptions of girls and women who are just trapped by
   their own faulty thinking. This is similar to the perspective
   that encourages us to blame a “culture of poverty” in the inner
   city rather than examine economic and political barriers — a
   very appealing explanation to those who benefit from those
   barriers and would rather fault their victims for failing to
   pull themselves up by their mindset.



   Having spent a few decades watching one idea after another
   light up the night sky and then flame out — in the field of
   education and in the culture at large — I realize this
   pattern often has less to do with the original (promising) idea
   than with the way it has been oversimplified and poorly
   implemented. Thus, I initially thought it was unfair to blame
   Dweck for wince-worthy attempts to sell her growth mindset as a
   panacea and to give it a conservative spin. Perhaps her message
   had been distorted by the sort of people who love to complain
   about grade inflation, trophies for showing up, and the
   inflated self-esteem of “these kids today.” In the late 1990s,
   for example, right-wing media personality [82]John Stossel
   snapped up a paper of Dweck’s about praise, portraying it as an
   overdue endorsement of the value of old-fashioned toil — just
   what was needed in an era of “protecting kids from failure.”
   Their scores stink but they feel good about themselves anyway —
   and here’s a study that proves “excellence comes from effort”!


   This sort of attack on spoiled kids and permissive (or
   excessive) parenting is nothing new — and most of its claims
   [83]dissolve on close inspection. Alas, Dweck not only has
   failed to speak out against, or distance herself from, this
   tendentious use of her ideas but has put a similar spin on them
   herself. She has allied herself with gritmeister Angela
   Duckworth and made Stossel-like [84]pronouncements about the
   underappreciated value of hard work and the perils of making
   things too easy for kids, pronouncements that wouldn’t be out
   of place at the Republican National Convention or in a
   small-town Sunday sermon. Indeed, Dweck has [85]endorsed a
   larger conservative narrative, claiming that “the self-esteem
   movement led parents to think they could hand their children
   self-esteem on a silver platter by telling them how smart and
   talented they are.” (Of course, most purveyors of that
   narrative would be just as contemptuous of praising kids for
   how hard they’d tried, which is what Dweck recommends.)


   Moreover, as far as I can tell, she has never criticized a
   fix-the-kid, ignore-the-structure mentality or raised concerns
   about the “bunch o’ facts” traditionalism in schools. Along
   with many other education critics, I’d argue that the
   appropriate student response to much of what’s assigned isn’t
   “By golly, with enough effort, I can do this!” but “Why the
   hell should anyone have to do this?” Dweck, like Duckworth, is
   conspicuously absent from the ranks of those critics.

   It isn’t entirely coincidental that someone who is basically
   telling us that attitudes matter more than structures, or that
   persistence is a good in itself, has also bought into a
   conservative social critique. But why have so many educators
   who don’t share that sensibility endorsed a focus on mindset
   (or grit) whose premises and implications they’d likely find
   troubling on reflection?

   I’m not suggesting we go back to promoting an innate, fixed,
   “entity” theory of intelligence and talent, which, as Dweck
   points out, can leave people feeling helpless and inclined to
   give up. But the real alternative to that isn’t a different
   attitude about oneself; it’s a willingness to go beyond
   individual attitudes, to realize that no mindset is a magic
   elixir that can dissolve the toxicity of structural
   arrangements. Until those arrangements have been changed,
   mindset will get you only so far. And too much focus on mindset
   discourages us from making such changes.

   Alfie Kohn is the author of 14 books on education, parenting,
   and human behavior, including, most recently, “The Myth of the
   Spoiled Child” (Da Capo Press) and “Schooling Beyond Measure”
   (Heinemann). He can be reached at www.alfiekohn.org and
   followed on Twitter at @alfiekohn.
   [86]Alfie Kohn is the author of "[87]No Contest: The Case
   Against Competition" (1986), "[88]The Myth of the Spoiled
   Child," published in paperback this month, and a dozen books in
   between.
   [89]More Alfie Kohn.



