[18]Mathematicians Discovered Something Super Freaky About Prime
Numbers


   [19][19g01ous5zg09jpg.jpg]
   [20]George Dvorsky
   [21]3/14/16 8:45pm
   [22]Filed to: Mathematics






   [27]336[28]40







   [vy6alpfbeotuxltzxtei.png]

   Mathematicians have discovered a surprising pattern in the
   expression of prime numbers, revealing a previously unknown
   “bias” to researchers.

   Primes, as you’ll hopefully remember from fourth-grade math
   class, are numbers that can only be divided by one or
   themselves (e.g. 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, etc.). Their
   appearance in the roll call of all integers cannot be
   predicted, and no magical formula exists to know when a prime
   number will choose to suddenly make an appearance. It’s an open
   question as to whether or not a pattern even exists, or whether
   or not mathematicians will ever crack the code of primes, but
   most mathematicians agree that there’s a certain randomness to
   the distribution of prime numbers that appear back-to-back.

   Or at least that’s what they thought. Recently, a pair of
   mathematicians decided to test this “randomness” assumption,
   and to their shock, they discovered that it doesn’t actually
   exist. As [34]reported in New Scientist, researchers Kannan
   Soundararajan and Robert Lemke Oliver of Stanford University in
   California have detected [35]unexpected biases in the
   distribution of consecutive primes.


   Advertisement

   The mathematicians made the discovery while performing a
   randomness check on the first hundred million primes. Within
   that set, a prime ending in 1 is followed by another ending in
   1 just 18.5 percent of the time. That shouldn’t happen if they
   were truly random—we should expect to see this happen 25
   percent of the time (keep in mind that primes can only end in
   1, 3, 7, or 9). So while this isn’t a pattern—it’s also not
   totally perfectly random. In terms of the back-to-back
   distribution of the other numbers, primes ending in 3 and 7
   appeared 30 percent of the time, and consecutive 9s appears
   about 22 of the time. Importantly, this observation has nothing
   to do with the base-10 numbering system, and is something
   inherent to primes themselves.

   That’s like, really weird, and certainly unexpected. So what’s
   going on? According to Soundararajan and Lemke Oliver, it may
   have something to do with what’s called the k-tuple
   conjecture—an old idea about how often pairs, triples, and
   larger sets of primes make an appearance.

   [36]Spencer Greenberg, a mathematician and founder of
   [37]ClearerThinking.org, told Gizmodo that the k-tuple
   conjecture is an attempt to understand the proximity of prime
   numbers to themselves. “Or more precisely, as we get larger and
   larger numbers, how often do we see prime numbers that have
   other primes nearby,” he said. “And it allows you to get very
   precise about what you mean by ‘nearby’.” For example,
   Greenberg says mathematicians can study primes that have a
   fixed spacing to five other primes. Basically, the k-tuple
   conjecture puts constraints on finding a prime that’s close to
   another prime. The new study has some interesting things to say
   about these constraints.


   “As the numbers get larger, though, it sounds like this is less
   constraining, causing it to get closer and closer to an equal
   distribution of ending digits— which makes intuitive sense,
   since the primes get rarer and rarer,” he said.

   Greenberg said it’s important to remember that primes, like the
   digits of pi, feel really random, but they’re not random at
   all. “They are determined precisely by the properties of
   numbers—it’s just that when we stare at their occurrence,
   [38]our brains can’t see the pattern, so it feels like random
   madness.”


   As fascinating as the new study appears to be, it likely won’t
   help with other prime-related problems, including the
   [39]twin-prime conjecture or the [40]Riemann hypothesis. And in
   fact, this discovery may have no practical use or implications
   to math and number theory. But as mathematician Andrew
   Granville told New Scientist, “It gives us more of an
   understanding, every little bit helps. If what you take for
   granted is wrong, that makes you rethink some other things you
   know.”


   Advertisement

   Sponsored

   [[41]New Scientist, [42]Nature News]



