Table of Contents

Pushing Limits: From West Point to Berkeley & Beyond

   Base Product Code Keyword List: mbk; MBK; mbk/103; MBK/103;
   mbk-103; MBK-103
   Print Product Code: MBK/103
   Online Product Code: MBK/103.E
   Title (HTML): Pushing Limits: From West Point to Berkeley &
   Beyond
   Author(s) (Product display): Ted Hill
   Affiliation(s) (HTML): Georgia Tech, Atlanta, GA and Cal Poly,
   San Luis Obispo, CA
   Publisher Blurb: A co-publication of the AMS and Mathematical
   Association of America
   Abstract:

   Pushing Limits: From West Point to Berkeley and Beyond
   challenges the myth that mathematicians lead dull and ascetic
   lives. It recounts the unique odyssey of a noted mathematician
   who overcame military hurdles at West Point, Army Ranger School
   and the Vietnam War, and survived many civilian
   escapades—hitchhiking in third-world hotspots, fending off
   sharks in Bahamian reefs, and camping deep behind the
   forbidding Iron Curtain. From ultra-conservative West Point in
   the ’60s to ultra-radical Berkeley in the ’70s, and ultimately
   to genteel Georgia Tech in the ’80s, this is the tale of an
   academic career as noteworthy for its offbeat adventures as for
   its teaching and research accomplishments. It brings to life
   the struggles and risks underlying mathematical research, the
   unparalleled thrill of making scientific breakthroughs, and the
   joy of sharing those discoveries around the world. Hill's book
   is packed with energy, humor, and suspense, both physical and
   intellectual. Anyone who is curious about how one maverick
   mathematician thinks, who wants to relive the zanier side of
   the ’60s and ’70s, who wants an armchair journey into the third
   world, or who seeks an unconventional view of several of
   society's iconic institutions, will be drawn to this book.
   [109]Click here to Listen to an interview with author Ted Hill.
   Publication Month and Year: 2017-04-03
   Copyright Year: 2017
   Page Count: 294
   Cover Type: Hardcover
   Print ISBN-13: 978-1-4704-3584-4
   Online ISBN 13: 978-1-4704-3671-1
   Online ISSN:
   Primary MSC: 01
   Textbook?: False
   Applied Math?: False
   Home Page?: false
   Featured?: false
   Sample?: false
   Reference?: false
   Electronic Media?: False
   Apparel or Gift: False
   Publisher (non-AMS): A co-publication of the AMS and
   Mathematical Association of America
   SXG Subject: GI
   Supplemental Materials (URL at AMS):
   Online Price 1 Label: List
   Online Price 1: 25.00
   Print Price 1 Label: List
   Print Price 1: 45.00
   Online Price 2 Label: Individual Member
   Online Price 2: 20.00
   Print Price 2 Label: Individual Member
   Print Price 2: 36.00
   Online Sale Terms: Use code GRAD17 to save up to 40% (AMS
   members) or 25% (non-members) off list prices (no additional
   discounts apply).
   Print Sale Terms: Use code GRAD17 to save up to 40% (AMS
   members) or 25% (non-members) off list prices (no additional
   discounts apply).
   Print Add to Cart URL: /some/url/at/AMS/MBK-103
   Electronic Add to Cart URL: /some/url/at/AMS/MBK-103.E
   Review Copy:
   671-1&pisbn=978-1-4704-3584-4&epc=MBK/103.E&ppc=MBK/103&title=P
   ushing%20Limits%3A%20From%20West%20Point%20to%20Berkeley%20%26a
   mp%3B%20Beyond&author=Ted%20Hill&type=R
   Readership:


   General readers interested in mathematics careers and
   education, adventure travel, military life, the 1960s-70s, and
   how all this combines together; mathematics educators,
   students, and graduates, especially those of West Point,
   Stanford, and Berkeley.
   Reviews:

   ... captivating memoir reveals an intriguing character who is
   part Renaissance Man, part Huckleberry Finn. Fast-paced and
   often hilarious ... provides some penetrating and impious
   insights into some of our more revered institutions.

   -- Rick Atkinson, three-time Pulitzer Prize winner, author of
   The Long Gray Line

   Ted Hill is unique in having both a very exciting internal
   mathematical life ... and an action-filled, adventurous,
   external life. ... his natural gift, very rare for
   mathematicians, of story-telling, [makes this] a page-turner.

   -- Doron Zeilberger, Rutgers University, winner of MAA Ford
   Prize, AMS Steele Prize, and ICA Euler Medal

   Thoughtful, funny, evocative, Ted Hill takes us through a life
   well-lived ... an intensely personal story that will appeal to
   every profession—and to every generation!

   -- General Wesley Clark, former NATO Supreme Commander

   Ted Hill is an original. Mathematician. Adventurer. Activist.
   His life has seen both his mind and body tested to extremes ...
   insightful, entertaining and —in a very good way—unlike any
   other book you will ever read by a mathematician.

   -- Alex Bellos, author of Here's Looking at Euclid and The
   Grapes of Math

   A fascinating journey from pure adventurism...through West
   Point and the Vietnam War to the highest intellectual
   accomplishments. At the center is a beautiful portrayal of the
   tedious, but highly rewarding road from graduate school to
   becoming a substantial research mathematician. A joy to read.

   -- David Gilat, Professor Emeritus, School of Mathematical
   Sciences, Tel Aviv University

   It is well known that math is boring and that mathematicians
   are dull individuals lacking both social skills and common
   sense. Wait a minute.Ted Hill might change your mind. His
   almost mathemagical life experiences are like a platter of
   petit fours: sample one and you'd want a second, then a third
   and soon you're addicted.

   -- Christian Houdré , Professor of Mathematics, Georgia
   Institute of Technology

   I loved the book. Extraordinary job of making scenes come
   alive...with great energy and really good dialog.

   -- David Ignatius, Columnist and Associate Editor at The
   Washington Post, author of Body of Lies

   Most people think that mathematics has nothing to do with daily
   life. These folks need to spend a few hours with Ted. He sees
   life through a mathematical lens and brings excitement and
   adventure to everything he comes in contact with.

   -- Martin Jones, Professor of Mathematics, College of
   Charleston

   Ted Hill's incredible life story shows that a mathematical life
   can be heroic.

   -- Reuben Hersh, coauthor of The Mathematical Experience,
   winner of a National Book Award in Science

   The first adjectives...when thinking about a
   mathematician...are likely to [be] words such as: eccentric,
   reclusive, nerd. Ted Hill amply demonstrates that, at least in
   his case, nothing could be further from the truth, as he offers
   us a glimpse of the fascinating world of an accomplished
   mathematician.

   -- Mario Livio, author of The Golden Ratio and the upcoming
   Why?

   Ted Hill's fascinating and raucous memoir...is proof that life
   in the exotic world of theoretical mathematics doesn't preclude
   and in fact benefits from passionate engagement with the real
   world.

   -- Jack Miller, Physicist, Lawrence Berkeley National
   Laboratory

   Ted Hill is the Indiana Jones of mathematics. A West Point
   graduate, [he] served in Vietnam, swam with sharks in the
   Caribbean, and has resolutely defied unreasoned authority. With
   this same love of adventure, he has confronted the sublime
   challenges of mathematics. Whether it's discovering
   intellectual treasures or careening down jungle trails, this
   real life Dr. Jones has done it all.

   -- Michael Monticino, Professor of Mathematics and Special
   Assistant to the President, U. North Texas

   Straddling the military and the mathematical worlds, Ted Hill's
   life is full of contradictions, daring exploits and
   accomplishments, and outright fun and adventure. A fascinating
   read...

   -- John Allen Paulos, Professor of Mathematics at Temple
   University, author of Innumeracy and A Mathematician Reads the
   Newspaper

   This [memoir]...will thrill and perplex the reader, by the
   seamless mixture of mind-adventure and body adventure, and for
   the unconventional academic path traveled by its author. Hill
   perpetually runs into trouble with authorities...[but]
   befriends mathematicians all over the world... With verve and
   nerve, Hill writes the story of...a life that touches on the
   highly exceptional, rich in friendship, thought, and humane
   warmth.

   -- Mircea Pitici, Cornell University, Editor of Best Writing on
   Mathematics

   Ted Hill has led an exciting life, and his vivid stories shed
   light on some remarkable times and places. Mathematicians will
   especially appreciate his chapters on graduate school and his
   early professional life; he brings our shared experiences to
   life in a way that only an outstanding writer can do.

   -- Walter Stromquist, past Editor of Mathematics Magazine

   Ted Hill paints vivid pictures of his life in the military and
   academia. From West Point and Vietnam to Berkeley and Georgia
   Tech, his trials and hair-raising adventures are highly
   entertaining and informative.

   -- Bill Sudderth, Professor Emeritus of Statistics, U. of
   Minnesota

   Ted Hill took a very unusual route to...mathematics: a military
   start and a stint in Vietnam, followed by a first-rate degree
   at one of the top programs in the world (Berkeley) and a highly
   successful career. This path, in addition to providing him with
   many adventures, has allowed him to look at thing(s) a little
   differently than most mathematicians...

   -- Stan Wagon, Macalester College, winner of MAA Ford Prize,
   author of The Banach-Tarski Paradox
   Related Products: [110]Stephen Smale: The Mathematician Who
   Broke the Dimension Barrier [111]Peter Lax, Mathematician
   Cover Image URL: ~~FreeAttachments/mbk-103-cov.jpg


























