How three black women helped send John Glenn into orbit

   A new film, Hidden Figures, tells the story of the maths
   wizards who Nasa relied on










   This article is 6 months old

   [135]Edward Helmore


   Saturday 10 December 2016 19.05 EST Last modified on Wednesday
   25 January 2017 07.18 EST

   When John Glenn was waiting to be fired into orbit aboard
   Friendship 7 in 1962, there was one person he trusted with the
   complex trajectory calculations required to bring him down
   safely from his orbital spaceflight: Katherine Johnson, an
   African-American mathematician who worked in Nasa’s segregated
   west area computers division.

   “Get the girl, check the numbers,” Glenn said before boarding
   the rocket. “If she says they’re good, I’m good to go.”

   Johnson was one of three female African-American mathematicians
   known as the “computers in skirts” who worked on the Redstone,
   Mercury and Apollo space programmes for [136]Nasa. Now, thanks
   to an award-tipped movie, Johnson, Mary Jackson and Dorothy
   Vaughan are about to become more widely celebrated.


   The film, Hidden Figures, stars [137]Taraji P Henson of TV
   series Empire, soul singer and actress Janelle Monáe, Octavia
   Spencer from The Help movie, and Academy Award winner Kevin
   Costner.


   Katherine Johnson a

   [138]Facebook [139]Twitter [140]Pinterest


   Katherine Johnson at Nasa Langley Research Center in 1980.
   Photograph: Nasa

   [141]Glenn’s death at the age of 95 last week, coupled with the
   film industry’s desire to correct last year’s damaging
   through the racial and gender discrimination of an all-male
   flight research team, suggests the film will now have the
   momentum to launch itself forcefully into the film awards
   season.


   Monáe, who plays Jackson, told the Observer that the three
   women broke through and changed the face of a white male
   profession. Jackson fought through the courts to join courses
   that would allow her to even be admitted to the Nasa programme.
   “These women were told that their dreams were not valid because
   of their gender and the colour of their skin,” said Monáe. “But
   these were two things they could not change – and would not
   want to – because [Jackson] was a proud black woman.”

   A corresponding breakthrough, said Monáe, was Hollywood’s
   willingness to make a mainstream film about African-American
   women. “Most of the time we’re portrayed as the maid, the nanny
   or the secretary,” she said. “But to be portrayed as
   brilliant-minded, outspoken, to dress sharply and be the voice
   of a new generation of women – now audiences are going to see a
   different side of us.”

   Mary Jackson at NASA Langley Research Centre in 1980.

   [142]Facebook [143]Twitter [144]Pinterest


   Mary Jackson at NASA Langley Research Centre in 1980.
   Photograph: Bob Nye/NASA

   The filmmakers hope the movie, based on the book [145]Hidden
   Figures: the American Dream and the Untold Story of the Black
   Women Mathematicians who helped win the Space Race by Margot
   Lee Shetterly, will also help to lift the stigma that is often
   attached to women in the sciences. “If a girl, of whatever age
   or ethnicity, is inclined toward science, technology
   engineering and math, they should be encouraged and that
   passion should be fostered because if we only had the male
   perspective, women will continue to be marginalised and
   objectified,” said Spencer, who plays Vaughan.


   Monáe hopes Hidden Figures will help to boost the [146]Fem the
   Future gender-equality project that she launched over the
   summer with Kenyan-Mexican actress [147]Lupita Nyong’o, who won
   an Oscar for 12 Years a Slave.


   Dorothy Vaughan in her twenties.

   [148]Facebook [149]Twitter [150]Pinterest


   Dorothy Vaughan in her twenties. Photograph: Courtesy the
   Family of Dorothy Johnson Vaughan

   Their plans include putting on a women-focused pop and tech
   festival next year. “We’re out there but it’s going to take all
   of us coming together – just like going into space – to get it
   done or it does not get done,” Monáe said.

   Pharrell Williams, one of the film’s executive producers who
   also wrote several songs for the film, added his voice to calls
   for women’s role in science to be more widely acknowledged. “Up
   until recently, a woman’s contribution to history has often
   been dismissed, discounted and often at times even erased from
   public acknowledgment,” he told the Directors Guild of America
   last month.

   The story of Nasa’s black female mathematicians has always been
   celebrated within the agency, but not widely known about
   beyond. Following an executive order prohibiting racial
   discrimination in the defence industry, Nasa’s predecessor, the
   National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (Naca) began
   recruiting African Americans with college degrees in the 1940s
   for the computer pool.

   The agency considered women more patient and detail-oriented
   than men – and they could be paid less. They were assigned the
   work of reading, calculating and plotting test data. But the in
   the pre-civil rights era, African Americans occupied a
   segregated wing and used separate facilities.

   In the late 1980s, a Nasa researcher noticed the black women in
   agency photographs from the period. The film’s director,
   Theodore Melfi, explained that parts of their story were known
   but that the segregated computer group existed only for a short
   time before IBM brought in the first computers in 1961.


