Star Dash Studios

   I [44]took the National Numeracy Challenge with my friend David
   Cushing back in 2014. I remain undecided about how useful it
   is.


   The National Numeracy continues to fight the good fight,
   promoting numeracy across all age groups and sections of
   society.

   They’ve got a new game out called [45]Star Dash Studios, and
   it’s surprisingly good!


   IFRAME:


   You play a runner on a film set. The majority of the game is,
   fittingly, running – it’s one of those things where you have to
   avoid obstacles and pick up coins for as long as possible.
   Every now and then, you’ll bump into a member of the crew, who
   asks you to do a job which – and here’s the very cleverly
   hidden educational content – involves some mental maths.

   My favourite task is the make-up artist, who asks you to work
   out when they should start glamming up an actor so they’re
   ready in time for shooting. It’s literally a single
   subtraction, but I don’t think I’ll ever tire of seeing a nice
   actress turn into a groady Orc.

   Other jobs involve balancing the camera crane, paying extras,
   or cutting bits of wood for the carpenter. Unless I’m missing
   something, the tasks that involve approximate measurement
   are particularly weak: you might be asked to halve a 3m piece
   of wood, but the measuring stick is only marked every 1m,
   meaning you have to guess where 1.5m is. I failed at that quite
   a few times, and I don’t know why.

   The maths is really simple, and scattered fairly sparsely
   between mindless running sections. But it’s all useful, the
   sort of maths that I wouldn’t think twice about doing, but
   that a large section of the population wouldn’t be confident
   with. I don’t know who to recommend Star Dash Studios to – the
   school-age kids I know are all expected to do much more
   complicated stuff, and I’m not sure how an adult would react to
   me suggesting they fix their terrible numeracy skills with a
   game.

   It’s really good though. Well done!

   Play: Star Dash Studios is available on iOS and Android
   [47]from National Numeracy.



