Print this article

   [8]biology[9]evolution[10]genetics[11]insights puzzle


   After a string of Insights puzzles related to physics, on the
   [12]relationship between time and entropy, [13]half-lives,
   [14]overhang and [15]quantum weirdness, we turn this month to
   the mysteries of biological evolution. Carrie Arnold’s article,
   “[16]Evolution Runs Faster on Short Timescales,” explores new
   research showing that genetic changes that are quite brisk when
   measured over a few generations seem to slow down considerably
   when measured over millions of years. One of the researchers
   who have studied this in genomes is Simon Ho, an evolutionary
   biologist at the University of Sydney. To quote Arnold:


   When [Ho] calculated how quickly DNA mutations accumulated in
   birds and primates over just a few thousand years, Ho [17]found
   the genomes chock-full of small mutations. This indicated a
   briskly ticking evolutionary clock. But when he zoomed out and
   compared DNA sequences separated by millions of years, he found
   something very different. The evolutionary clock had slowed to
   a crawl.


   The article goes on to describe how, from a mathematical
   perspective, evolutionary rates decrease exponentially as the
   timescale increases.

   Can we replicate this in a toy version of a single gene? Let’s
   find out. But first, let’s go over the basics for those who
   need to brush up on them: Here’s DNA 101 for puzzle
   enthusiasts.

   A gene is a piece of DNA, which is essentially a linear chain
   of chemical bases that are abbreviated using the letters A, C,
   G and T. Each of these four letters (bases) appears in random
   sequence along a given gene, in about equal amounts. Thus the
   sequence CATGGTACCGAT represents a piece of DNA that is 12
   units long. The way DNA works is that each successive
   three-letter piece of DNA, called a triplet, codes for one of
   20 possible units, called amino acids, that make up a protein.
    Proteins are the body’s workhorses, each one performing
   different functions thanks to its unique structure and its
   unique linear sequence of amino acids. Thus in our DNA sequence
   above, there are four triplets, CAT, GGT, ACC and GAT, each of
   which codes for a specific amino acid. This piece of DNA,
   acting through the cell machinery, will form a piece of a
   specific protein fragment that is four units long.

   Now, DNA is generally copied with high fidelity from cell to
   cell across generations. But, on rare occasions, you can get a
   “point mutation,” in which one of the letters of the gene
   sequence is replaced by another random one, causing the gene to
   produce a different protein, which may be more or less
   efficient at doing what it was supposed to. This is basically
   how evolutionary change happens. We can define the speed at
   which DNA mutates over time as the evolutionary rate: We can
   measure it over a given period by counting the number of
   letters that have changed between the original DNA sequence and
   the current sequence, divided by the number of years that have
   passed.

   OK, lesson over. That’s all the biology we need for our puzzle.


