Some probability problems for your consideration

   [15]January 24, 2017 [16]Darryl Yong


   As I was preparing this [17]tweet on AMS prizes given at the
   2016 Joint Mathematics Meetings…


   capture

   …I checked the [18]AMS Annual Survey of the Mathematical
   Sciences to determine that in 2015 roughly 30% of full-time
   faculty in the mathematical sciences were female. Then, I wrote
   and did the following math problem:


     Question #1: Suppose that 20 people are being chosen for
     various awards. Assume that for each award, there is a
     committee that narrows the field of candidates down to a set
     of 10 finalists who are deserving of the award, and 3 of
     them are female. Assume that each committee independently
     chooses the winner from this set of finalists in such a way
     that each of the finalists is equally likely to win the
     award. What is the probability that none of the 20 people
     are women?

   Answer: (0.7)^20 ≈ 0.0007979

   That seems really unlikely.

   Some people are going to argue that because women have been
   excluded from the mathematical sciences to a greater degree in
   our recent history, the population of senior people who have
   made big contributions to their fields is going to skew even
   more male than the general population of full-time faculty.
   (BTW, not all of the awards above are for senior people who’ve
   made big contributions.) OK, so let’s consider another problem.

     Question #2: Keep everything from Question #1 the same but
     this time let’s assume that x (in %) of the finalists for
     each award are men. What would x have to be so that the
     probability of not having any women chosen is something more
     likely, like 25%?

   Answer: x^20=0.25 means x ≈ .933 ( or 93.3%)

   Is it the case that there are so few women deserving of awards
   in mathematics?

   I assert that we don’t suffer from a lack of talented women and
   people of color in the mathematical sciences. The problem is
   that we don’t nurture talented women and people of color, don’t
   recognize their talent, and don’t take enough steps to make
   sure our award processes are unbiased, fair, and equitable.
   (There is plenty of evidence that women are just as implicitly
   biased against women as men are.)

   Look at the dramatic change in the representation of people of
   color in this year’s Oscar nominations, compared to a mere two
   years ago when #OscarsSoWhite was trending. Did the field
   suddenly produce a bunch of new Black artists and producers and
   directors in those two years? No.  So why can’t those of us in
   the mathematical sciences also try harder to make sure that we
   make sure award winners are more broadly representative?

   Every time a women or person of color looks at a list of
   winners like this one, they receive messages that they aren’t
   welcome in the field.

   Important caveats:
       implying that the actual awarding of the AMS prizes is
       anything like what is described above.
       members were deliberately being racist or sexist.
       were not deserving and should return their prizes.
       underrepresentation of women, and I also recognize that
       there is an underrepresentation of African-American,
       Hispanic/Latinx, and Native American people among the award
       winners.

   It would be interesting to go back in history to look at the
   demographics of all AMS prize winners.

   Recommended reading:

   “[19]Addressing the underrepresentation of women in mathematics
   conferences” by Greg Martin


   The MAA’s [20]guidelines for award selection committees on how
   to avoid implicit bias.





