The Invention of Zero: How Ancient Mesopotamia Created the
Mathematical Concept of Nought and Ancient India Gave It Symbolic
Form

“If you look at zero you see nothing; but look through it and you
will see the world.”

By Maria Popova

   [94]The Invention of Zero: How Ancient Mesopotamia Created the
   Mathematical Concept of Nought and Ancient India Gave It
   Symbolic Form


   If the ancient Arab world had closed its gates to foreign
   travelers, we would have no medicine, no astronomy, and no
   mathematics — at least not as we know them today.

   Central to humanity’s quest to grasp the nature of the universe
   and make sense of our own existence is zero, which began in
   Mesopotamia and spurred one of the most significant paradigm
   shifts in human consciousness — a concept first invented (or
   perhaps discovered) in pre-Arab Sumer, modern-day Iraq, and
   later given symbolic form in ancient India. This twining of
   meaning and symbol not only shaped mathematics, which underlies
   our best models of reality, but became woven into the very
   fabric of human life, from the works of Shakespeare, who
   famously winked at zero in King Lear by calling it “an O
   without a figure,” to [95]the invention of the bit that gave us
   the 1s and 0s underpinning my ability to type these words and
   your ability to read them on this screen.


   Mathematician Robert Kaplan chronicles nought’s revolutionary
   journey in [96]The Nothing That Is: A Natural History of Zero
   ([97]public library). It is, in a sense, an archetypal story of
   scientific discovery, wherein an abstract concept derived from
   the observed laws of nature is named and given symbolic form.
   But it is also a kind of cross-cultural fairy tale that
   romances reason across time and space
   [98][little1_page10.jpg] Art by Paul Rand from [99]Little 1 by
   Ann Rand, a vintage concept book about the numbers


   Kaplan writes:

     If you look at zero you see nothing; but look through it and
     you will see the world. For zero brings into focus the
     great, organic sprawl of mathematics, and mathematics in
     turn the complex nature of things. From counting to
     calculating, from estimating the odds to knowing exactly
     when the tides in our affairs will crest, the shining tools
     of mathematics let us follow the tacking course everything
     takes through everything else – and all of their parts swing
     on the smallest of pivots, zero

     With these mental devices we make visible the hidden laws
     controlling the objects around us in their cycles and
     swerves. Even the mind itself is mirrored in mathematics,
     its endless reflections now confusing, now clarifying
     insight.

     […]

     As we follow the meanderings of zero’s symbols and meanings
     we’ll see along with it the making and doing of mathematics
     — by humans, for humans. No god gave it to us. Its muse
     speaks only to those who ardently pursue her.

   With an eye to the eternal question of whether mathematics is
   discovered or invented — a question famously debated by
   [100]Kurt Gödel and the Vienna Circle — Kaplan observes:


     The disquieting question of whether zero is out there or a
     fiction will call up the perennial puzzle of whether we
     invent or discover the way of things, hence the yet deeper
     issue of where we are in the hierarchy. Are we creatures or
     creators, less than – or only a little less than — the
     angels in our power to appraise?

   [101][themissingpiecemeetsthebigo23.jpg] Art by Shel
   Silverstein from [102]The Missing Piece Meets the Big O


   Like all transformative inventions, zero began with necessity —
   the necessity for counting without getting bemired in the
   inelegance of increasingly large numbers. Kaplan writes:

     Zero began its career as two wedges pressed into a wet lump
     of clay, in the days when a superb piece of mental
     engineering gave us the art of counting.

     […]

     The story begins some 5,000 years ago with the Sumerians,
     those lively people who settled in Mesopotamia (part of what
     is now Iraq). When you read, on one of their clay tablets,
     this exchange between father and son: “Where did you go?”
     “Nowhere.” “Then why are you late?”, you realize that 5,000
     years are like an evening gone.

     The Sumerians counted by 1s and 10s but also by 60s. This
     may seem bizarre until you recall that we do too, using 60
     for minutes in an hour (and 6 × 60 = 360 for degrees in a
     circle). Worse, we also count by 12 when it comes to months
     in a year, 7 for days in a week, 24 for hours in a day and
     16 for ounces in a pound or a pint. Up until 1971 the
     British counted their pennies in heaps of 12 to a shilling
     but heaps of 20 shillings to a pound.

     Tug on each of these different systems and you’ll unravel a
     history of customs and compromises, showing what you thought
     was quirky to be the most natural thing in the world. In the
     case of the Sumerians, a 60-base (sexagesimal) system most
     likely sprang from their dealings with another culture whose
     system of weights — and hence of monetary value — differed
     from their own.

   Having to reconcile the decimal and sexagesimal counting
   systems was a source of growing confusion for the Sumerians,
   who wrote by pressing the tip of a hollow reed to create
   circles and semi-circles onto wet clay tablets solidified by
   baking. The reed eventually became a three-sided stylus, which
   made triangular cuneiform marks at varying angles to designate
   different numbers, amounts, and concepts. Kaplan demonstrates
   what the Sumerian numerical system looked like by 2000 BCE:

   This cumbersome system lasted for thousands of years, until
   someone at some point between the sixth and third centuries BCE
   came up with a way to wedge accounting columns apart,
   effectively symbolizing “nothing in this column” — and so the
   concept of, if not the symbol for, zero was born. Kaplan
   writes:

     In a tablet unearthed at Kish (dating from perhaps as far
     back as 700 BC), the scribe wrote his zeroes with three
     hooks, rather than two slanted wedges, as if they were
     thirties; and another scribe at about the same time made his
     with only one, so that they are indistinguishable from his
     tens. Carelessness? Or does this variety tell us that we are
     very near the earliest uses of the separation sign as zero,
     its meaning and form having yet to settle in?

   But zero almost perished with the civilization that first
   imagined it. The story follows history’s arrow from Mesopotamia
   to ancient Greece, where the necessity of zero awakens anew.
   Kaplan turns to Archimedes and his system for naming large
   numbers, “myriad” being the largest of the Greek names for
   numbers, connoting 10,000. With his notion of orders of large
   numbers, the great Greek polymath came within inches of
   inventing the concept of powers, but he gave us something even
   more important — as Kaplan puts it, he showed us “how to think
   as concretely as we can about the very large, giving us a way
   of building up to it in stages rather than letting our thoughts
   diffuse in the face of immensity, so that we will be able to
   distinguish even such magnitudes as these from the infinite.”
   “Archimedes Thoughtful” by Domenico Fetti, 1620

   This concept of the infinite in a sense contoured the need for
   naming its mirror-image counterpart: nothingness. (Negative
   numbers were still a long way away.) And yet the Greeks had no
   word for zero, though they clearly recognized its spectral
   presence. Kaplan writes:

     Haven’t we all an ancient sense that for something to exist
     it must have a name? Many a child refuses to accept the
     argument that the numbers go on forever (just add one to any
     candidate for the last) because names run out. For them a
     googol — 1 with 100 zeroes after it — is a large and living
     friend, as is a googolplex (10 to the googol power, in an
     Archimedean spirit).

     […]

     By not using zero, but naming instead his myriad myriads,
     orders and periods, Archimedes has given a constructive
     vitality to this vastness — putting it just that much nearer
     our reach, if not our grasp.

   Ordinarily, we know that [103]naming is what gives meaning to
   existence. But names are given to things, and zero is not a
   thing — it is, in fact, a no-thing. Kaplan contemplates the
   paradox:


     Names belong to things, but zero belongs to nothing. It
     counts the totality of what isn’t there. By this reasoning
     it must be everywhere with regard to this and that: with
     regard, for instance, to the number of humming-birds in that
     bowl with seven — or now six — apples. Then what does zero
     name? It looks like a smaller version of Gertrude Stein’s
     Oakland, having no there there.

   Zero, still an unnamed figment of the mathematical imagination,
   continued its odyssey around the ancient world before it was
   given a name. After Babylon and Greece, it landed in India. The
   first surviving written appearance of zero as a symbol appeared
   there on a stone tablet dated 876 AD, inscribed with the
   measurements of a garden: 270 by 50, written as “27°” and “5°.”
   Kaplan notes that the same tiny zero appears on copper plates
   dating back to three centuries earlier, but because forgeries
   ran rampant in the eleventh century, their authenticity can’t
   be ascertained. He writes:

     We can try pushing back the beginnings of zero in India
     before 876, if you are willing to strain your eyes to make
     out dim figures in a bright haze. Why trouble to do this?
     Because every story, like every dream, has a deep point,
     where all that is said sounds oracular, all that is seen, an
     omen. Interpretations seethe around these images like froth
     in a cauldron. This deep point for us is the cleft between
     the ancient world around the Mediterranean and the ancient
     world of India.

   But if zero were to have a high priest in ancient India, it
   would undoubtedly be the mathematician and astronomer
   Āryabhata, whose identity is shrouded in as much mystery as
   Shakespeare’s. Nonetheless, his legacy — whether he was indeed
   one person or many — is an indelible part of zero’s story.
   Āryabhata (art by K. Ganesh Acharya)

   Kaplan writes:

     Āryabhata wanted a concise way to store (not calculate with)
     large numbers, and hit on a strange scheme. If we hadn’t yet
     our positional notation, where the 8 in 9,871 means 800
     because it stands in the hundreds place, we might have come
     up with writing it this way: 9T8H7Te1, where T stands for
     ‘thousand’, H for “hundred” and Te for “ten” (in fact, this
     is how we usually pronounce our numbers, and how monetary
     amounts have been expressed: £3.4s.2d). Āryabhata did
     something of this sort, only one degree more abstract.

     He made up nonsense words whose syllables stood for digits
     in places, the digits being given by consonants, the places
     by the nine vowels in Sanskrit. Since the first three vowels
     are a, i and u, if you wanted to write 386 in his system (he
     wrote this as 6, then 8, then 3) you would want the sixth
     consonant, c, followed by a (showing that c was in the units
     place), the eighth consonant, j, followed by i, then the
     third consonant, g, followed by u: CAJIGU. The problem is
     that this system gives only 9 possible places, and being an
     astronomer, he had need of many more. His baroque solution
     was to double his system to 18 places by using the same nine
     vowels twice each: a, a, i, i, u, u and so on; and breaking
     the consonants up into two groups, using those from the
     first for the odd numbered places, those from the second for
     the even. So he would actually have written 386 this way:
     CASAGI (c being the sixth consonant of the first group, s in
     effect the eighth of the second group, g the third of the
     first group)…

     There is clearly no zero in this system — but interestingly
     enough, in explaining it Āryabhata says: “The nine vowels
     are to be used in two nines of places” — and his word for
     “place” is “kha”. This kha later becomes one of the
     commonest Indian words for zero. It is as if we had here a
     slow-motion picture of an idea evolving: the shift from a
     “named” to a purely positional notation, from an empty place
     where a digit can lodge to “the empty number”: a number in
     its own right, that nudged other numbers along into their
     places.

   Kaplan reflects on the multicultural intellectual heritage
   encircling the concept of zero:

     While having a symbol for zero matters, having the notion
     matters more, and whether this came from the Babylonians
     directly or through the Greeks, what is hanging in the
     balance here in India is the character this notion will
     take: will it be the idea of the absence of any number — or
     the idea of a number for such absence? Is it to be the mark
     of the empty, or the empty mark? The first keeps it
     estranged from numbers, merely part of the landscape through
     which they move; the second puts it on a par with them.

   In the remainder of the fascinating and lyrical [104]The
   Nothing That Is, Kaplan goes on to explore how various other
   cultures, from the Mayans to the Romans, contributed to the
   trans-civilizational mosaic that is zero as it made its way to
   modern mathematics, and examines its profound impact on
   everything from philosophy to literature to his own domain of
   mathematics. Complement it with this [105]Victorian love letter
   to mathematics and the illustrated story of [106]how the
   Persian polymath Ibn Sina revolutionized modern science.



