The risks of trying to be funny

   david's picture
   Submitted by david on Wed, 08/06/2016 - 3:45pm

   I’ve had a lot of publicity over the last few days, but none of
   it was welcome. It arose from the story below from the Daily
   Telegraph of June 6 with the headline “Britons are having less
   sex, and Game of Thrones could be to blame, says Cambridge
   professor”

   game-thrones-telegraph.jpg

   I really did say all this. At a talk for the general public at
   the Hay Festival plugging [13]Sex by Numbers, I was talking
   about the decline in sexual activity over the last 20 years
   identified by the NATSAL survey, and said that the press was
   obsessed with the reasons for this. As a statistician, I
   couldn’t say why this decline had occurred, but Ipads have been
   mentioned. I then made the comments about box sets, and that
   this trend would mean there would be no sex by 2030 (I even got
   the sums wrong), and that this was very worrying – this was
   delivered with over-the-top enthusiasm, and got a gratifyingly
   big laugh from the audience. A standard use of ludicrous
   exaggeration as a source of humour (although it does lose
   somewhat in the retelling).


   In spite of the obvious joke, the Telegraph chose to report
   this as a serious scientific finding (although the article
   [14]has now been re-written). The consequence was the story
   spreading like a virus across a huge range of media, including
   the dailys, Newsweek and so on, all of whom just copied the
   Telegraph article and only one making any attempt to get in
   touch with me. The virus mutated in the process and the
   headlines became increasingly exaggerated, including [15]Sex
   Will Be Obsolete by 2030 Because of Netflix, According to One
   Lone Scientist, and [16]Couples 'will stop having sex by 2030'
   due to the large rise in TV ratings. Only [17]one journalist
   identified that this was clearly a joke.


   There has also been a queue of radio interview requests from
   the BBC, Australia, Russia, New Zealand, Argentina and so on,
   all keen to know about my research on how Game of Thrones was
   going to mean the end of sex. I didn't oblige. Also a stream of
   derogatory tweets about the idiot professor who is denying
   ‘Netflix and chill’ (a euphemism for casual sex).

   This episode does not show journalism at its best, and it would
   be laughable if it were a deliberate April Fool. It also
   provides great material for getting laughs in future talks. But
   I also feel I have been casually exploited for click-bait (the
   Telegraph story is, of course, highly cited on Google), and
   amazed that this was done by a science journalist. But I’m not
   going to stop putting comic exaggerations into my public talks.




