The New Shape of DNA

   Mark Bathe merges design and biology at the nanoscale

   An assortment of DNA nanoparticle geometries designed by
   DAEDALUS. Colors represent different classes of geometric
   objects, including Platonic (blue), Johnson (green),
   Archimedean (red), Catalan (yellow), and other (purple) complex
   shapes. Image: Digizyme, Inc.

   [12]Winter 2017


   [13]Daniel Grushkin


   Step into associate professor Mark Bathe’s lab in the
   Department of Biological Engineering and you’ll find design and
   biology merging at the nanoscale. Under an electron microscope
   you might see a cornucopia of three-dimensional
   shapes—icosahedra, pyramids, and stars—all assembled from
   synthetic strands of DNA. “There’s no other molecular medium we
   can design and fabricate with such a versatility of geometries
   and precision at the nanoscale as DNA,” says Bathe ’98, SM ’01,
   PhD ’04.

   And Bathe has added to that versatility: with graduate student
   Sakul Ratanalert, he recently developed software called
   DAEDALUS, which captures the complex rules of DNA construction
   in an algorithm that makes three-dimensional DNA design easier
   and more accessible to a wide range of scientists and
   engineers.

   Most people think of the spiraling set of nucleic acids purely
   as the code of life. The strings of As, Ts, Cs, and Gs
   (adenine, thymine, cytosine, and guanine) in cells provide the
   blueprint for how living things behave and reproduce. And for
   nearly half a century bioengineers have creatively manipulated
   those sequences to change the way organisms function—breeding
   new pest-resistant plants, for example, or microbes that
   ferment medicines and chemicals.

   But the double helix of DNA also possesses unique
   characteristics as a nano-building material. In 2006, Caltech
   researcher Paul Rothemund discovered that if he synthesized DNA
   letters in specific sequences, the molecular bonds that glue
   the As to Ts and Cs to Gs, and which come undone when DNA
   replicates, could be used to fold the DNA into two- and
   three-dimensional shapes. With a nod to both the precision and
   elegance of the technique, scientists dubbed it “DNA origami.”

   The beauty of DNA origami is that once the components are
   collected, all it takes is a little shake and some Brownian
   motion—the random movement of particles in fluid—for these
   shapes to assemble themselves. The system uses a single long
   strand of DNA as scaffolding on which to stick smaller strings
   of letters. The DNA conforms to the shape as the letters bond
   to each other.

     The beauty of DNA origami is that once the components are
     collected, all it takes is a little shake and some Brownian
     motion—the random movement of particles in fluid—for these
     shapes to assemble themselves.

   But the rules for designing DNA origami are difficult, if not
   arcane, and lining up nucleotides to fold into corresponding
   3-D shapes can tax even the most brilliant minds. “It’s been
   limited to a small group of experts,” Bathe says. His software
   is changing that.

   Rather than manually fiddling with sequences of nucleotides,
   DAEDALUS users design the target geometric structures they
   want, and the algorithm generates the corresponding nucleotide
   sequences to make them. “You give the software a high-level
   geometric shape, and then it will automatically produce that
   shape using DNA,” Bathe says.

   In a sense, Bathe himself may be a perfect researcher for
   exploring how these geometries translate across scales. He’s
   part of an MIT legacy—the son of longtime engineering faculty
   member Klaus-Jürgen Bathe. Like his father, the younger Bathe
   earned his PhD in mechanical engineering; but from childhood,
   his interests skewed towards biology and medicine. “I’ve always
   wanted to build technologies that impact human health, more
   than cars or bridges, like my father,” he says. With DAEDALUS,
   Bathe has built a bridge of another kind, connecting designers
   of many disciplines with the tools of molecular biology.

   Bathe is now working to harness his DNA nanoshapes to deliver
   drugs inside the body. Taking a cue from viruses that attach to
   cells to infect them, Bathe hopes to design a variety of DNA
   structures that deliver payloads of antibodies or even
   gene-editing enzymes such as Cas9 to diseased cells within the
   body. “The holy grail would be to edit the brain for treatment
   of diseases such as autism or schizophrenia, or cancer cells in
   malignant tumors,” Bathe says.
   [14][bathe-400x300.jpg]



